BOOK 244.L977 c. 1 
LUTHER # TABLE TALK 




PLEASE NOTE 



It has been necessary to replace some of the original 
pages in this book with photocopy reproductions 
because of damage or mistreatment by a previous user. 

Replacement of damaged materials is both expensive 
and time-consuming. Please handle this volume vy^ith 
care so that information will not be lost to future readers. 

Thank you for helping to preserve the University's 
research collections. 



/^u^o^^^Wv^^-Y c-^^-'^y^K 



LIT CAS Ct. A.2:A 



■\ \ 



I THE 

! 
I 

iTABLE TALK 

OP 

MARTIN LUTHER. 

TRANSLATED AND EDITED 

iJ By WILLIAM HAZLITT, Esq. 



NEW EDITION, TO WHICH IS ADDED 



|THE LIFE OF MARTIN LUTHER, 

By ALEXANDER CHALMEIIS. . 
WITH ADDITIONS PEOM MIOHELET AT^D AUDfS, 



j LONDON: 

BELL & DALDY, YORK STREET. COVENT GARDEN. 

1872. 



33» 
-.74- MS 



3H^ 



LONDON. PRIKXICD BT WU.UAJI CLOCKS AXP ?OX.S .'STAMFOKD, SXEBL1 i 

AifD cKAitrxG cnoss. . . I 



I I 



PUBLISHER'S NOTICE. 



'^9^ 



The present edition of Luther's Table Talk is, as regards 
the main body of the book, exactly the same as that formerly 
published by Mr. Bogue in his ' European Library' (being 
printed from the same stereotype plates), but it has some 
important additions. 

It seemed desirable that a Life of Luther should be 
prefixed ; it was therefore determined, after much examination 
and enquiry, to adopt that by Alexander Chalmers, subjoining 
illustrative anecdotes from the more recent biographies of 
Michelet and Audin. To this is appended Luther's Cate- 
chism, always an interesting morceau. The Portrait is 
another addition, and is undoubtedly the most pleasing of 
all those painted by Luther's intimate friend, the celebrated 
Lucas Cranach. 

Notwithstanding these additions, the price of the volume 
has not been enhanced. 

H. G. B. 

Dec. 20, 1S56. 



conte:n'ts. 



Fape 

Inteoduction, by Wm. Hazlitt V 

AuEIFABER's PeEFACE XV 

Life of Luthee, by Alexander Chalmees, enlarged, xxv 

Ltjthee's Catechism xcviii 

LUTHEE'S TABLE TALK. 

Of God's Word 1 

Of God's Works 28 

Of the Nature of the World 59 

Of Idolatry 68 

Of Jesus Christ 76 

Of the Holy Ghost 106 

Of Sins . . 110 

Of Free-will . 117 

Of the Catechism 124 

Of the Law and the Gospel 129 

Of Justification . . . . . . . .142 

Of Prayer 155 

Of Baptism 160 

Of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper .... 166 

Of the Church 169 

Of Excommunication 175 

Of Preachers and Preaching 179 

Of Antichrist 193 

Of Purgatory 226 

Of Councils 226 

Ofthe Fathers of the Church 232 



CONTENTS. 

Pagre 

Of tlie Patriarchs and Prophets 236 

Of the Apostles and Disciples of Christ .... 244 

Of Angels . 245 

Ofthe Devil and his Works 247 

Of Temptation and Tribulation 269 

Of Luther's Adversaries 280 

Of Offences 289 

Of a Christian Life 294 

Of Marriage and Celibacy 297 

Of Princes and Potentates 308 

Of Discord 314 

Of Sicknesses, and of the Causes thereof . . . 315 

Of Death 318 

Of the Eesurrection 322 

Of Allegories 326 

Of Spiritual and Church Livings 330 

Of Constrained Defence 333 

Of Lawyers 337 

Of Universities, Arts, &c 338 

Of Astronomy and Astrology 341 

Of Learned Men 344 

Of the Jews 346 

Of the Turks 354 

Of Countries and Cities 361 

Of Vocation and Calling 363 

Miscellaneous 364 



Kelative Duties expressed in Scripture Words by Luther . 373 



TNTRODUCTTON. 



The history of this remarkable volume, almost as extraor- 
dinary as its contents, is thus given by Captain Bell : 

"CAPTAIN HENRY BELL'S NAERATIVE : 

Or, Relation of the miraculous preserving of Dr. Martin Luther's Book, 
entitled, ' Colloquia Mensalia, or, his Divine Discourses at his Table, 
held with divers learned Men and pious Divines; such as Philip 
Melancthon, Caspar Cruciger, Justus Jonas, Vitus Dietrich, John 
Bugenhagen^ John Forster, &c. : containing Divers Discourses touching 
Religion, and other main Points of Doctrine ; as also many notable 
Histories, and all sorts of Learning, Comforts, Advices, Prophecies, 
Admonitions^ Directions, and Instructions. 

"I, Captain Henry Bell, do hereby declare, both to the present age, and 
also to posterity, that being employed beyond the seas in state affairs divers 
years together, both by king James, and also by the late king Charles, in 
Germany, I did hear and understand, in all places, great bewailing and 
lamentation made, by reason of the destroying and burning of above four- 
score thousand of Martin Luther's books, entitled, ' His Last Divine Dis- 
courses.' 

"For after such time as God stirred up the spirit of Martin Luther to 
detect the corruptions and abuses of popery, and to preach Christ, and 
clearly to set forth the simplicity of the gospel, many kings, princes, and 
states, imperial cities, and Hans-towns, fell from the popish religion, and 
became protestants, as their posterities still are, and remain to this very day. 

" And for the further advancement of the great work of reformation then 
begun, the aforesaid princes, and the rest did then order, that the said 
Divine Discourses of Luther should forthwith be printed ; and that every 
parish should have and receive one of the aforesaid printed books into 
every church throughout all their principalities and dominions, to be chained 
up, for the common people to read therein. 



n INTRODUCTION. 

" Upon ■vvhi^h divine work, or Discourses, the Reformation, began before 
in Germany, was wonderfully promoted and increased, and spread both here 
in England, and other countries besides. 

"But afterwards it so fell out, that the pope then living, viz., Gregory 
XIII., understanding what great hurt and prejudice he and his popish reli- 
gion had already received, by reason of the said Luther's Divine Discourses, 
and also fearing that the same might bring further contempt and mischief 
upon himself, and upon the popish church, he therefore, to prevent the 
same, did fiercely stir up and instigate the emperor then in being, viz., 
Eudolphus II. to make an edict throughout the whole empire, that all the 
aforesaid printed books should be burnt ; and also, that it should be death 
for any person to have or keep a copy thereof, but also to biu-n the same ; 
which edict was speedily put in execution accordingly; insomuch that not 
one of all the said printed books, nor so much as any one copy of the same, 
could be found out nor heard of in any place. 

"Yet it pleased God, that, anno 1626, a German gentleman, named 
Casparus Van Sparr, with whom, in the time of my staying in Germany 
about king James's business, I became very familiarly known and ac- 
quainted, having occasion to build upon the old foundation of a house, 
wherein his grandfather dwelt at that time, when the said edict was pub- 
lished m Germany for the burning of the afoi-esaid books ; and digging 
deep into the ground, under the said old foundation, one of the said original 
books was there happily found, lying in a deep obscure hole, being wrapped 
in a strong linen cloth, which was waxed all over with bees-wax, within 
and without ; whereby the book was preserved fair, without any blemish 

" And at the same time Ferdinandus II. being emperor in Germany, who 
was a severe enemy and persecutor of the protestaut religion, the aforesaid 
gentleman, and grandchild to him that had hidden the said books in that 
obscure hole, fearing that if the said emperor should get knowledge that 
one of the said books was yet forthcoming, and in his custody, whereby not 
only himself might be brought into trouble, but also the book in danger to 
be destroyed, as all the rest were so long before ; and also calling me to 
mind, and knowing that I had the high Dutch tongue veiy perfect, did send 
the said original book over hither into England unto me ; and therewith 
did write unto me a letter, wherein he related the passages of the preserving 
and finding out the said book. 

" And also he earnestly moved me in his letter, that for the advancement 
of God's glory, and of Christ's church, I would take the pains to translate 
the said book, to the end, that that most excellent divine work of Luther 
might be brought again to light. 

" Whereupon I took the said book before me, and many times began tc 
translate the same, but always I was hindered tlierein, being called upon 
about other business : insomuch, that by no possiijle means I could remain 



INTRODUCTION. VU 

by that work. Then, about six weeks after I had received the said book, it fell 
out, that I being in bed with my wife one night, between twelve and one of 
the clock, she being asleep, but myself yet awake, there appeared unto me an 
pocient man, standing at my bedside, arrayed all in white, having a long 
and broad white beard hanging down to his girdle steed, who taking me by 
my right ear, spake these words following unto me : ' Sirrah I will not you 
take time to translate that book which is sent unto you out of Germany ? 
I will shortly provide for you both place and time to do it ;' and then he 
vanished away out of my sight. 

" Whereupon being much thereby affrighted, I fell into an extreme sweat : 
insomuch, that my wife awaking, and finding me all over wet, she asked 
me what I ailed ? 1 told her what I had seen and heard ; but I never did 
heed nor regard visions nor dreams. And so the same fell soon out of my 
mind. 

" Then about a fortnight after I had seen that vision, on a Sunday, I 
went to Whitehall to hear the sermon ; after which ended, I returned to my 
lodging, which was then at King-street, at Westminster, and sitting down 
to dinner with my wife, two messengers were sent from the whole council- 
boai'd, with a warrant to carry me to the keeper of the Gatehouse, West- 
minster, there to be safely kept, until further order from the lords of the 
council ; which was done without showing me any cause* at all wherefore I 
was committed. Upon which said warrant I was kept ten whole years 
close prisoner, where I spent five years thereof about the translating of the 
said book ; insomuch as I found the words very true which the old man, in 
the aforesaid vision, did say unto me — ' J. will shortly provide for you both 
place and time to translate it.' 

" Then after I had finished the said translation in the prison, the late 
archbishop of Canterbury, Dr. Laud, understanding that I had translated 
such a book, called ' Martin Luther's Divine Discourses,' sent unto me his 
chaplain. Dr. Bray, into the prison, with this message following: 

" ' Captain Bell, 

" ' My lord grace of Canterbury, hath sent me unto you, to tell 
you, that his grace hath understood that you have translated a book of 
Luther's ; touching which book his grace, many years before, did hear of 
the burning of so many thousands in Germany, by the then emperor. Hisr 
grace therefore doth desire you, that you would send unto him the said 
original book in Dutch, and also your translation ; which, after his grace 
hath perused, shall be returned safely unto you.' 

"Whereupon I told Doctor Bray, that I had taken a great deal of paioh 
in translating the said book, and was very loath to part with it out of my 

* The cause of the captain's corfimitment was his pressing the Lord 
Treasurer for arrears of pay. 

5 



Vlll INTRODUCTION. 

hands ; and, therefore, I desired him to excuse me to his grace, that T could 
not part from it; with which answer he at that time returned again to his 
master. 

" But the next day after he sent him unto me again, and hid him tell me 
that, upon his honour, the book should be as safe in his custody, if not 
safer, than in mine own; for he would lock it up in his own cabinet, to the 
end no man might come unto it, but only himself. Thereupon, I knowing 
it would be a thing bootless for me to refuse the sending of them, by reason 
he was then of such great power, that he would have them, nolens volcns, 
I sent them both unto him. Then after he had kept them in his custody 
two months, and had daily read therein, he sent the said doctor unto me, to 
tell me that I had performed a work worthy of eternal memory, and that he 
had never read a more excellent divine work ; yet saying that some things 
therein were fitting to be left out, and desired me not to think long, that he 
did not return them unto me so soon again. The reason was, because that 
the more he did read therein, the more desire he had to go on therewith ; 
and so presenting me with teu livres in gold, he returned back again. 

" After which, when he had them in his custody one whole year, and 
that I understood he had perused it all over, tben I sent unto his grace, and 
humbly desired, that his grace would be pleased to return me my books 
again. Whereupon he sent me word by the said Dr. Bray, that he had not 
as yet perused them so thoroughly over as he desired to do; then 1 stayed 
yet a year longer before I sent to him again. 

" In which time I heard for certain, that it was concluded by the king 
and council, that a parliament should forthwith be called ; at which news I 
did much rejoice. And then I sent unto his grace an humble petition, and 
therein desired the returning of my book again ; otherwise I told him 1 
should be enforced to make it known, and to complain of liim to the pai'lia- 
ment, which was then coming on. Whereupon he sent unto me again 
safely both the said original book, and my translation, and caused his 
chaplain, the said doctor, to tell me, that he would make it known unto his 
majesty what an excellent piece of work I had translated, and that he would 
procure an order from his majesty to have the said translation printed, and 
to be dispersed throughout the whole kingdom, as it was in Germany, as he 
had heard thereof; and thereupon he presented me again with forty livres 
in gold. 

"'And presently after I was set at liberty by warrant from the whole 
House of Lords, according to his majesty's direction in that behalf: but 
shortly afterwards the archbishop fell into his troubles, and was by the 
parliament sent unto the Tower, and afterwards beheaded. Insomuch that 
I could never since hear anything touching the printing of my book. 

" The House of Commons having then notice that I had translated the 
afcresaid book, they sent for me, and did appoint a committee to see it, and 



INTRODUCTION. 1^ 

the translation, anil diligently to make enqniiy whether the translation did 
agree with the original or no; -whereupon they desired me to bring the 
same before them, silting then in the Treasury Chamber. And Sir Edward 
Dealing being chairman, said unto me, that he was acquainted with a 
leaa-ned minister beneficed in Essex, who had lived long in England, but 
was born m High Germany, in the Palatinate, named Mr. Paul Amiraut, 
whom the committee sending for, desired him to take both the original and 
my translation into his custody, and diligently to compare them together, 
and to make report unto the said committee whether he found that I had 
rightly and truly translated it according to the original : which report he 
made accordingly, and they being satisfied therein, referred it to two of the 
assembly, Mr. Chai-les Herle, and Mr. Edward Corbet, desiring them dili- 
gently to peruse the same, and to make report unto them if they thought it 
fitting to be printed and published. 

" Whereupon they made report, dated the 10th of November, 1646, that 
they found it to be an excellent divine work, worthy the light and pub- 
lishing, especially in regard that Luther, in the said Discourses, did revoke 
his opinion, which he formerly held, touching Consubstantiation in the 
Sacrament. Whereupon the House of Commons, the 24th of February, 
1646, did give order for the printing thereof. 

" Thus having been lately desired to set down in writing the relation of 
the passages abovesaid concerning the said book, as well for the satisfac- 
tion of judicious and godly Christians, as for the conservation of the perpe- 
tual memory of God's extraordinary providence in the miraculous preserva- 
tion of the aforesaid Divine Discourses, and now bringing them again to 
light, I have done the same according to the i)lain truth thereof, not doubt 
ing but they will prove a notable advantage of God's glory, and the good 
and edification of the whole church, and an unspeakable consolation of 
every particular member of the same. 

" Given under my hand the third day of July, 1650- 

" Hexby Bell."* 



* A Copy of the Order from the House of Commons. 

24th February, 1646. 
Whereas Captain Henry Bell has strangely discovered and found a book 
of Martin Luther's, called his Divine Discourses, which was for a long time 
very marvellously preserved in Germany: the which book, the said Henry 
Bell, at his gi-eat costs and pains, hath translated into the English out of 
the German tongue, which translation and substance thereof is approved by 
Reverend Divines of the Assembly, as appeai-s by a certificate under their 
hands : 

It is ordered and ordained by the Lords and Commons assembled lit par- 
L^ament, that the said Henry Bell shall have the sole disposal and benefit of 
'■njiting itue- said book, translated into English by him as aforesaid, for the 



^X INTRODUCTION, 

The contents of the book themselves were gathered from 
the mouth of Luther, by his friends and disciples, and chieiiy 
by Antony Lauterbach and John Aurifaber (Goldschmidtj. 
who were very much with the great Reformer towards the 
close of his life. They consist of notes of his discourses, of 
his opinions, his cursory observations, in the freedom of private 
friendship, in his walks, during the performance of his clerical 
duties, and at table. The reporters were brim-full of zeal: 
whatever " the man of God" uttered was forthwith entered 
upon their tablets. They were with him at his uprising and 
his down-lying; they looked over his shoulder as he read or 
wrote his letters; did he utter an exclamation of pain or of 
pleasure, of joy or of sorrow^, down it went: did he aspirate 
a thought above breath, it was caught by the intent ear of 
one or other of the listeners, and committed to paper. An 
anecdote, told by Luther himself to Dr. Zincgreff, amusingly 
illustrates the assiduity of these German Boswells. During 
a colloquy, in which Dominus Marti nus was exhibiting his 
wonted energetic vivacity, he observed a disciple hard at 
work with pencil and paper. The doctor, slily filling his 
huge wooden spoon with the gruel he was discussing by way 
of supper, rose, and going up to the absorbed note-taker, 
threw the gruel in his face, and said, laughing lustily: " Put 
that down too." There can be as little doubt of the com- 
pleteness as of the authenticity of their notes. Filled with 
the most profound respect for " the venerable man of God," 
they would have deemed it sacrilege to omit, or alter, or mo- 
dify, aught that fell from his lips. The oracle had spoken; 
it %vas their pride and glory to repeat his words with the 
most scrupulous fidelity. We will describe the result, in the 

space of fourteen years, to commence from the date hereof. And that none 
do print or reprint the same, but such as sliall be licensed by the said 
captain by authority under his hand. 

(Vera Copia) Henry Elsykg. 



INTRODUCTION. XI 

words of an eloquent letter to the translator, prefixed to the 
folio edition of 1652: — 

" Herein is a full character of the free and zealous spirit of Martin 
Liither, who was a man of God raised in his generation with invincible 
courage to beat down the strongest holds of Satan, wherein for manie gene- 
rations he had captivated the spirits of our forefathers under poperie. The 
depth and soliditie of his judgment may be discovered in the writings which 
he himself did publish in his life-time : but in this collection of his extem- 
porary discourses published since his death, the fullness of his aflfectiou, 
and genuine readiness of his spirit, may be seen, which did incline him to 
advance the truth of the gospel, and manifest the testimonie of Jesus upon 
all occasions. And truly, I have met (in that which I have looked upon) 
with many excellent and fundamental truths, necessarie to be minded in this 
age, as well as in that wherein he spake them ; and the gracefulness which 
they have in their familiar and careless dress, doth make them the more 
commendable to all men of ingenuitie, not only of popular capacities, but 
even of more raised thoughts. Whence I do probably conjecture that the 
plainness and gi'eat variety of matters contained in these discourses, did in 
the first reformation ingratiate the delivery and insinuate the consideration 
of most eminent truths with acceptance into all men's apprehensions, so far, 
as to cause the enemies of those truths to endeavour the suppressing of this 
book, which they found to be so much taking with everybody, and so full of 
deadly blows given to their superstition and hierai'chie, to their profaneness. 
hypocrisie, and irapietie." 

" We should, indeed, seek in vain elsewhere for more striking and in- 
teresting specimens of the talents, the disposition, and the manners of the 
great Reformer, than in this volume of his ' Table-Talk.' And certainly if 
the personal character of any individual deserves to be dwelt upon, it is that 
of Luther. In no other instance have such great events depended upon the 
courage, sagacity, and energy, of a single man, nor can there be found c 
more profitable study than the temper and peculiarities of one, who, by his 
sole and unassisted eff'orts, made his solitary cell the heart and centre of 
the most wonderful and important commotion the world ever witnessed ; 
who, by the native force and vigour of his genius, attacked and successfully 
resisted, and at length overthrew the most awful and sacred authority that 
ever imposed its commands on mankind." 

" In perusing the work itself, we may here observe, it must always be r(»- 
collected that they show the Reformer in his undress, and are not to be taken 
as specimens of what he wrote or preached when girded up for great occa- 
sions ; — though it maybe observed that, like most men of genius, there was 
less difi'erence in the language and manner of Luther in private and publio. 



Xll INTRODUCTION. 

than is tlie case ■svith tliose who cannot afford to be free, homely, and fnmil'ar: 
— a great peculiarity of both his preaching and writing was, that, despising all 
form and authority, he went straight to the hearts of his hearers and readers, 
and never hesitated to use an image or impression, however coarse or homely, 
provided it conveyed his meaning with liveliness and force." 

The first German edition of the Tischreden, or Table- 
Talk, of Martin Luther, a folio volume, was published at 
Eisleben, in 1566, under the editorial care of John Auri- 
faber. This edition was reprinted twice in 1567, and a 
fourth time in 156S. The last reprint is prefaced by some 
new pages from the pen of the editor, who complains of one 
Dr. Kugling, as having, in a rival edition, made material 
alterations of the text. This rival edition, however, would 
appear never to have got beyond the manuscript form; at all 
events, it is unknown to bibliographers. The four editions 
already specified are exact reproductions, the one of the thero, 
infinite typographical blunders included. In 1569 appeared 
a new edition (Frankfurt, folio), wnth an appendix " of pro- 
phecies which the venerable man of God, just before his holy 
death, delivered unto divers learned theologians and eccle- 
siastics, with many consolatory letters, opinions, narratives, 
replies, &c., never before made public." The dedication " to 
the Council of Rauschemberg," dated 24th March, 1568, in- 
timates that the editor, John Fink, had derived his new 
materials from various books and writings of Martin Luther. 
Tlie Prophecies, it is added, were due to the research of 
George AValther, preacher at Halle. 

Fabricius f Centifolium Lutheranum, p. 301) mentions two 
other editions in folio, Eisleben, 1569 and 1577, but no 
copies of these editions are at present known. 

The next editor of the Tischreden was Andrew Stang- 
wald, a Prussian, the continuator of the Centuries of Magde- 
burg, who, in his preface, complains of the previous editions 
as very defective in their matter, and full of flagrant errors of 
typography. He states that his own corrected and enlarged 
edition had been prepared from various manuscript conver- 



INTRODUCTION. Xll. 

sations in his possession, aided by ample marginal notes to 
a copy of the original edition, formerly belonging to one of 
Luther's intimate associates, Dr. Joachim Merlinus. Stang- 
wald's compilation, which appeared in 1571 (Frankfurt), was 
reprinted in 1.590, with a dedication to the council of Mul- 
hausen, and a preface, wherein the editor announces a sup- 
plementary volume of colloquies and sayings, which, however, 
was never produced. The same text, but with Aurifaber's 
preface in lieu of Stangwald's, was reprinted in 1603 (Jena), 
and again in 1621 (Leipzig), and once more, after an interval 
of 80 years, in 1700 (Leipzig), when Stangwald's preface 
was given as well as Aurifaber's, and Walther's collection of 
Prophecies appended. This arrangement was re-produced in 
1 723 (Dresden and Leipzig). 

Another contemporary with Luther, Nicholas Selneuer, had 
also applied himself to the task of arranging his master's Table- 
Talk, and the result of his labours, prefaced by a Life of the 
great Reformer, appeared in 1577, and again in 1580, folio. 
This edition, however, does not materially depart from the 
text of Stangwald. 

The Tischreden, which had been hitherto excluded from 
the various collective editions of Luther's German works, 
were incorporated by Walch in the ponderous edition of 
1743 (Halle), but they were never inserted in the folio 
editions of the Reformer's Latin works. A selection from 
them, indeed, appeared in Latin, immediately after their first 
publication in German. This selection (Frankfort, 1566, 
8vo.) is entitled " Silvula Se?itentiarum, exemplarum, His- 
toriarum, allegoriarum, similitudinum, facetiariim, partirn ex 
reverendi Viri D. Martini Lutheri ac Philippi Melancthonis 
(Min privatis turn puhlicis relatio7iibus, partirn t-a aliorum 
veterum atqiie recentiiim doctorum monumentis ohservata^ 
The translator. Dr. Ericius, however, while making extracts 
only from Aurifaber, gives a number of articles omitted by 
the German editor. Next, in 1558-1571, Dr. Henry Peter 
Rebenstok, pastor of Eschersheim, sent forth in two volumes 



XIV INTRODUCTION. 

(Frankfurt-on the-Maine, 8vo.): ^^ Colloquia, Meditationes, 
Consolationes, Consilia, judicia, sententicE, narrationes, re- 
sponsa, facelics, D. Martini Lutheri, pice et sanctcB memorice 
in mens prandiia et ccencB et in peregrenationibus observata 
et fideliter transcripta.''^ Dr. Rebenstok informs us that 
his version was rendered not from Aurifaber, but from later 
editors. It was from this translation, couched in the most 
barbarous Latin, and replete with blunders of every descrip- 
tion, that Bayle criticised the " Colloquia Mensalia^ The 
edition itself, now excessively rare, is described by the 
Marquis du Roure, in his '^ Analecta-biblion" (Techener, 
1840). 

Of the English translation, by Captain Bell, an account 
has already been given. 

In preparing that translation, the captain appears to have 
been animated by the same closely scrupulous and somewhat 
indiscriminating fidelity which characterized the labours of 
those who compiled the original work. Some of the more im- 
possible faceticB, indeed, which escaped the plain-spoken 
German in the elasticity of post-prandial converse, the trans- 
lator has omitted or modified, but the infinite repetitions of 
"Meditationes, Consolationeo, consilia, judicia, narrat'nies, 
responsa," in the same or closely similar words, he hao re- 
produced with the most provoking pertinacity. 

It is by the omission — carefully considered — of these repe- 
titions, that I have been enab'ed to give, in the present ver- 
sion, not merely the contents of Aurifaber's collection, but 
large additions from the various other editors above specified. 
The chapters, in particular, of Antichrist, of the Devil and 
his Works, and of the Turks (which Michelet specifies as 
peculiarly interesting) have all been materially enlarged in 
this way. The ample icdex now given is an entirely new 
feature. 

W. HAZLITT. 

Middle Tomjile. 



DR. JOHN AURIFABER'S PREFACE, 



£o the Honourable and Right Worshipful the Head Governnrn, th^ 
Mayors and Aldermen of the Imperial Cities, Strasburg, Augsburg^ 
Ulm, Nuremberg, Lubeck, Hamburg, Brunswick^ Frankfurt on th< 
Maincy dc. 

Grace and peace from God the Father, through Christ 
Jesus our Lord. 

The holy and royal prophet David, in the 78th Psalm, says: 
" God made a covenant with Jacob, and gave Israel a law, 
which he commanded our fathers to teach their children, that 
their posterity might know it, and the children which were 
yet unborn; to the intent, that when they came up, they 
might show their children the same. That they might put 
their trust in God, and not forget the works of God, but 
to keep his commandments." 

In these words the great benefits of God are set forth and 
praised, in that he reveals to mankind his Holy Word, his 
covenants and laws, makes himself known, instructs us of 
sin and righteousness, of death and life, of condemnation and 
salvation, of hell and heaven, and in such wise gathers a 
Christian church to live w^ith him everlastingly; and the 
prophet wills also, that we should learn God's Woid with 
diligence, and should teach others therein, and should make 
it known to all people, and in nowise forget the wonderful 
works of God, but render thanks to him for them. 

Therefore, when God had suifered the children of Israel a 
long time to be plagued with severe servitude in Egypt, and 
thereby to fall into idolatry and false serving of God; to suffer 
great persecutions, and many other miseries, then he sent 
unto them Moses and Aaron, who kindled the hght of God's 
"Word again, and drew them from the abominable idolatry of 



XVI DR. JOHN AUKIFABER'S PREFACE. 

the heathens, and opened unto them the knowledge of the 
true God. 

Then he led them also with a powerful hand out of the 
bondage of Egypt, brought them through the Red Sea, and 
before their eyes overthrew and drowned the tyrant Pharaoh, 
with all the Escyptians. He showed unto them great good- 
ness also in the Wilderness; namely, he gave his command- 
ments unto them on Mount Sinai; he fed them with manna, 
or bread from heaven, and with quails, and gave them water 
to drink out of the rock; and moreover, he gave manifold 
victories unto them, as against the Amalekites, and otiier 
enemies. 

Then he gave unto them strict charge that they should 
always remember those unspeakable benefits, that they should 
speak thereof unto their children, and should be thankful for 
the same. 

For this cause they were yearly to observe and keep the 
feasts of Easter, of Whitsuntide, and of the Tabernacles, to 
the end they might always be mindful of God's goodnesses 
towards them; as is written in Exodus xiii.: '* Thou shalt 
show thy son in that day, saying. This is done because of 
that which the Lord did unto me when I came out of the land 
of Egypt. And it shall be for a sign unto thee upon thine 
hand, and for a memorial between thine eyes, that the Lord's 
law may be in thy mouth; for with a strong hand hath the Lord 
brought thee out of Egypt." But the children of Israel, after 
their wonderful deliverance, gave no great thanks to God for 
so many and great benefits; for, not long after they erected 
the golden calf, and danced about it. As also at the waters 
of strife they murmured against God, angered him, aiid drew 
his punishments upon them. 

We shoula also place before our eyes this admonition of the 
78th Psalm, and should thoroughly consider the example of 
the children of Israel, who so soon forgot their deliverance 
out of Egypt. For we may also well rejoice, that now, in 
our days, we have restored to us again God's Word gloriously 
bright and clear: so that we should show this inestimable 
treasure to our children's children, and how we are delivered 
and freed from the kingdom of antichrist, the pope of Rome, 
and from the traditions of men, which was a right Egyptian 
'japtivity, yea. a Babylonian imprisonment; in which our 



DR. JOHN AURIFABER S PREFACE. Xvii 

forefathers were worse tormented and plagued than the 
children of Israel were in Egypt. For God hath given also 
unto us in Germany a Moses, to be our captain and leader, 
namely, the much enlightened and famous man, Martin Luther, 
who, through God's special providence, has brought us out of 
Egyptian slavery, and has unveiled and cleared all the chief 
articles of the Christian religion; God so powerfully protect- 
ing and defending his doctrine, that it has remained and stood 
fast against the gates of hell. 

For although many learned men, universities, popes, cardi- 
nals, bishops, friars, and priests, and after them emperors, 
kings, and princes, raised their strong battery against this 
one man, Luther, and his doctrine, intending quite to sup- 
press it, yet, notwithstanding, all their labour was in vain. 
And this doctrine, which is the true and ancient doctrine of 
Christ, and of his apostles, remains and stands fast to this 
present day. 

And we should look back, and consider, how, and in what a 
lamentable manner it stood with us fifty years past, concern- 
ing the religion and government of the church, and in what 
miserable bondage we have been in Popedom; for this is un- 
known to our children; yea, we that are old have almost for- 
gotten it. 

And, first, in the temple of God sat the man of sin, and the 
child of perdition, namely, the Romish antichrist, of whom 
St. Paul prophesied, 2 Thess. ii. : " Who exalteth himself 
above all that is called God," or that is worshipped; he altered 
and perverted God's Word, laws, and statutes; and, in their 
place, instituted all manner of divine services, ceremonies, 
and ordinances, after his own will and pleasure, and in mani- 
fold ways and meanings, yea, oftentimes the one contrary 
to the other; so that in Popedom no man could know what 
was certain or uncertain, what was true or false, what was 
commanded or forbidden. 

He sold all things for money; he forced all people under 
his yoke, so that emperors were constrained to kiss his feet, 
and from him to receive their crowns; no king or prince 
dared to oppose him, nor once to frown at his commands or 
prohibitions. 

Hence he boasted, in his decrees and bulls, that he was 
God's general vicar on earth; that he was head of the church. 



XVm DR. JOHN AURIFABER S PREFACE. 

supreme bishop, and lord of all bishops and learned men in 
the universal world; that he was a natural heir and an in- 
heritor of the empire, and of all kingdoms when they fell 
void. His crown at Rome was named regnum mundi, every 
man must bow to him as to the most holy father and god on 
earth. And his hypocritical canonists maintained that he 
was not only a man, but that he was both god and man to- 
gether; who could not sin, and who had all divine and human 
wisdom in the cabinet of his heart ; from whose stool or chair 
even the Holy Scriptures must have and receive their power, 
virtue, and authority. 

He was the master of faith; and he only was able to ex- 
pound the Sacred Writ, and to understand it; yea, he was so 
sanctified, and so far from reproach, that although he should 
lead the third part of all the souls of mankind into the pit of 
hell, yet no man must dare to question or reprove him, or to 
demand why he did it. For everv one ought to believe, that 
his sacred celsitude, and sanctifaed power, neither would, 
should, nor could err. He had authority to make void and to 
annihilate both the New and Old Testaments. The church 
was built upon him, he could neither err nor fail, whence it 
followed of necessity that he w^as higher and more eminent 
than all the apostles. 

He had also power and authority to erect new articles of 
faith, which must be equal in value to the Holy Scripture, 
and which ought to be believed if people intended to be saved. 

He was likewise far above all councils and fathers, and to 
be judged by no terrestrial jurisdiction, but all must be sub- 
ject only and alone to his judgments and decrees. 

He made his Romish church the mother of all other 
churches, whence it came that all the world appealed thither. 
He was only and alone the governor of the church, as being 
far more abler and fitter to govern than the apostles them- 
selves if they had been living. 

He had power to command all people on earth, the angels 
in heaven, and the devils in hell. To conclude, the chair of 
Rome was so holy of itself, that although a wicked villain 
had been elected to be pope, yet so soon as he was set upon 
that chair, then instantly he was altogether holy. 

These boastings the pope gave out himself; and his dissem- 



DR. JOHN AURIFABER S PREFACE. XIX 

bling 'rencher-chaplains, the recorders of his decrees, decre^ 
tals, olementines and extravagants, propagated the same of 
^m in writing; so that his gorged paunch was puffed up, 
and he became so full of pride (as by his acts he showed) that, 
as a contra- Christ, he brought all into confusion. - P o r it i s - 
apparent in what manner he raged in and about the doctrine 
of the law, or ten commandments, and how tliese-were demo- 
lished and taken away by him. 

He utterly threw down the first three precepts; for he 
made a god of man's free-will, in that he taught, with his 
school-divines, that the natural strength of man, after the 
fall, remained sound and unspoiled; and that a man by his 
ow^n human strength (if he did but that which only lay in his 
own power to do) was able to observe and fulfil all the com- 
mandments, and thereby should stand justified before God. 
He taught also, that it was not grounded in the Scriptures, 
that the assistance of the Holy Ghost, with his grace, was 
needful to accomplish good works; but that every man, by his 
own natural strength and ability, has a free-will, in divine 
duties, to do well, good, and right. 

The other seven commandments the pope quite beats down, 
and exalted himself above parents and magistrates, and above 
the obedience due unto them, and instigated and stirred up 
children against their parents, and subjects against their 
rulers (as plainly appears by the imperial histories); great 
and fearful sins and transgressions against the fifth command- 
ment. 

He also usurped and drew to himself the temporal sword, 
and taught, that it is right and lawful to resist and drive 
away power with power: and that it is not an absolute com- 
mand (but only an advice) to love our enemies, to suffer 
wrong, &c. Such doctrine is quite opposite to the sixth com- 
mandment. 

Then, contrary to the seventh precept, he forbad his friars, 
priests, and nuns, to marry; and made way for them to live 
in licentiousness, v/ithout reproof; yea, and moreover received 
a yearly income and rent of such wretches. 

Contrary to the eighth commandment, he usurped to him- 
self kingdoms, principalities, countries, people, cities; towns, 
and villages, and took nossession of the most delijrhtful pk/^os 



XX DR. JOHN AURIFABER's PREFACE. 

and dwellings in the Avorkl, sueked poor people, and filled Ins 
thievish purse in such manner, that his spiritual shavelings 
are richer than temporal princes. 

He tore also in pieces, and made void all manner of solemn 
vows, promises, and covenants of peace, which were made 
without his popish consent and authority, directly against the 
ninth commandment. 

Lastly, and against the tenth commandment, he taught, 
that the wicked lusts of mankind were no sins, but proceed 
only out of human weakness. 

In such a manner, and out of a diabolical instinct, did the 
pope throw down all God's commandments, and instead thereof 
erected human laws and precepts. 

The like course he took also touching the preaching of the 
gospel. He preached nothing at all of Christ, of his person, 
works, precious merits, and benefits; nor in any way com- 
forted disti'essed sorrowful consciences. And people were 
altogether ignorant how or where they might obtain true re- 
mission of their sins, eternal life, and salvation. 

The papists declared also to the people, in their sermons, 
that the only Mediator between God and man, our Lord and 
Saviour Jesus Christ, was a severe and an angry judge, who 
would not be reconciled with us, except we had other advo- 
cates and intercessors besides himself. 

By this doctrine, people were seduced, and carried away to 
heathenish idolatry, and took their refuge in dead saints to 
help and deliver them, and made them their gods, in whom 
they put more trust and confidence than in our blessed 
Saviour Christ Jesus; and especially, they placed the Virgin 
Mary, instead of her son Christ, for a mediatrix on the throne 
of grace. 

Hence proceeded the pilgrimages to saints, where they 
sought for pardon and remission of sins. I'hey also sought for 
pardons of the pope, of the fraternities of friars, and of other 
orders. And people were taught, that they must purchase 
heaven by their own good works, austerities, fastings, and 
so on. 

And whereas prayer is the highest comfort of a Christian 
yea, his asylum, his shield and buckler against all adversi- 
ties; therefore the pope out of prayer made a naked work, 
a tedious babbling without spirit and truth. People prayed 



DR. JOHN AURIFABER S PREFACE. XXI 

in Latin psalters, and books which they understood not; they 
observed in praying, Horce iJanoniccB, or the seven times, 
with garlands of roses, with so many Bridget prayers, and 
other collects to the dead saints; and thereby wrought terror 
of consciences, so that people received no hope or true com- 
fort at all. Yet, notwithstanding, they were made to beheve 
that such prating should merit pardons and remissions of sins 
lor the space of many thousand years. 

Baptism, in Popedom, likewise had almost lost its lustre, 
for it was not only stained with human toys and additions, 
as with holy water, lights, oil, &c., but also it was celebrated 
in the Latin tongue, so that the laity, standing by, could not 
understand it; and in its place they constituted monkery as a 
second baptism, of equal value and operation, through which 
they were to be as pure and clean as those that received 
Christ's baptism, taking therein new names, (as the pope at 
his election,) contemning their first names, that they received 
in Christ's baptism. 

The Lord's Supper, in Popedom, also was dishonoured, 
corrupted, turned into idolatry, and wickedly abused; for 
they used the same not in remembrance of Christ, but as the 
offering of some wicked priest, and a self-merit of some 
despairing wretch that daily devoured it without faith, and 
afterwards sold it to others for money, to be imparted to the 
souls in purgatory, thereby to redeem them; so that out of 
the Lord's Supper they made a mere market. 

Moreover, the pope treacherously stole away from the laity 
the one part of the sacrament, namely, the wine; while the 
other part, wdiich was left, was closely shut up and preserved, 
and yearly, i7i die Corporis C/iristi, with great solemnity, was 
carried about and worshipped, and therewith they wrought 
fearful idolatry. 

With confession, the pope likewise brought into confusion 
the consciences of the whole world, and the souls of many 
into despair; giving people absolution, by reason of their 
own good works and merits; and thereby, instead of solace 
and comfort, he brought fear, disquiet, and discouragement, 
into the consciences of distressed and sorrowful people; and, 
irstead of true keys, made false, thievish picklocks, which he 
need in all his wicked proceedings. 

Now, when he had darkened and fabined God's Word, and 



XXU DR. JOHN AURIFABER S PREFACE. 

the doctrine of the law and gospel; had frustrated the sweet 
and comfortable prayers and true devotion towards God; had 
dishonoured baptism, the Lord's supper; then, at last, he 
proceeded to tread under foot the divine state and orders 
in the world; and of the pulpit and church government, made 
a temporal rule, wherein he sat as head and monarch, and 
under him, in order, the cardinals, archbishops, bishops, pre- 
lates, abbots, friars, nuns, priests, and innumerable other 
orders ; the poor laitj beini' altogether made a scorned tool 
of. 

By this short relation a man may easily collect in what 
state and condition the Christian church stood in Popedom. 
Such fearful darkness did God suffer to go over tlie wicked 
unthankful world as a just judgment. 

But God, who is abundant in grace and mercy, caused the 
light of the gospel again to rise in our time, and dispersed the 
gloomy clouds of human traditions, in awakening that most 
famous man of God, Luther, who, with his preaching and doc- 
trine, joined battle with Popedom, and, through God's Word, 
threw it to the ground, and thereby delivered us from the 
captivity of Popedom, led us again into the land of promise, 
and placed us in a paradise where God's Word is cleared, 
and, God be praised, the church cleansed from the cobwebs 
of men's traditions, purified and gloriously reformed, for 
which we never render sufficient thanks to Almighty God. 

For God, through Luther, brought forth the Bible, or the 
Holy Scripture, which formerly lay, as it were, under the 
table; translated by Luther ex ipsis fontibus, out of the He- 
brew into the German tongue, it may easily be read and un- 
derstood by young and old, rich and poor, clergy and laity, 
so that now, a father or master may daily read the Holy 
Scriptures to his wife, to his children, and servants, and may 
instruct them in the doctrines of grace, and direct them in the 
truth and in the true service of God. Whereas, before, in Pope- 
dom, the Bible was known to none: nay, the doctors in divi- 
nity themselves read not therein ; for Luther often affirmed in 
my hearing, that Dr. Andrew Carlstadt was a doctor in divi- 
nity eight years before he began to read in the Bible; that if 
we Germans were not blind like the moles, we should acknow- 
ledge these unspeakable graces and benefits of God; witb 
bended knees daily render hearty thanks, therefoi-e, to 



DR. JOHN AURIFABER S PREFACE. XXlll 

God; with the 34th Psahn, say: "I will always praise the 
Lord, his praise shall be ever in my mouth: my soul shall 
ever make her boast in the Lord." And, with the 103d 
Psalm: '• Praise the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within 
me praise his holy name: Praise the Lord, O my soul, and 
forget not the good that he hath done for thee." 

We should also pray heartily to God, that he would not 
extinguish this light of the Gospel, but suffer it long to shine, 
that our children's children and posterity may walk also in 
this saving light, rejoice therein and with us eternally be 
saved. 

The devil is a great enemy to this treasure of God's Word 
and his holy sacraments; he assaults it fiercely to quench 
this light, as plainly appeared after the death of this holy 
man of God, Luther. For first, strong attempt was made by 
the Interim, by what means the doctrine of justification by 
faith, of good works and a Christian kind of living, of the 
sacraments and well ordered ceremonies in our Christian 
church, might utterly be overthrown. 

Afterwards approached the conciliators, or the qualifiers, 
who sought to mediate between us and the pope, and to 
arrange them. They taught, that the nearer one kept him- 
self to the pope, the better; and therefore they proposed to 
restore the jurisdiction of the church to the popish bishops, 
and to raise up the fallen ceremonies; and whoso refused to 
follow them, fell into great danger. 

The Antinomians, Swenckfelders, Enthusians, co-agents, 
were also very diligent to eclipse again the true doctrines 
which Luther had cleared up, and brought again to light. 

All that professed to be Christians and upright teachers 
and preachers should have resisted these false and wicked 
errors. But many of them were dumb dogs, that would not 
bark, or set themselves against the ravening wolves to drive 
them from Christ's sheepfold, to feed the poor sheep, and to 
provide for them sweet and wholesome pasture. Neither 
were they any way careful of Joseph's miseries, as the pro- 
phet says. 

But others, who, like true and constant teachers, fought 
against those enemies of God, were reviled and held as rebels, 
boisterous and stiff-necked, that w^ould raise needless strifes 
and divisions, and were accordingly persecuted and plagued. 



XXIV DR. JOHN AURIFABER S PREFACE. 

In like manner the schools and universities began to fall 
again, and the pure doctrine of God's Word to be b)' them 
not much regarded, school divinity being held again in great 
repute, and many new phrases and other eloquent arts coming 
into the church, which gave occasion to falsities and errors. 

Thereupon the politicians, the lawyers, and courtiers 
essayed to rule the church and pulpits, to put in and put out 
ministers and churchwardens, to try causes of religion, accord- 
ing to their own fancies, as in temporal affairs; so that we see 
the falsifying of the doctrine, the devastation of the well-dis- 
ciplined orders of the church in Germany, and the captivity 
and tyranny of the pope again nigh the door — a result that 
Luther, in his lifetime, often foretold. 

Let us, therefore, make good use of Luther's light, and 
seriously exercise ourselves in the doctrine of God's AYord, 
as Christ commanded: " Walk in the light while ye have the 
light, that ye may be children of the light" The holy 
Psalmist prayed: " That the divine Word may be a lanthorn 
to his feet and a light to his paths," that thereby he might 
direct his ways, and be preserved from darkness and stumbling. 
And St. Peter charges us: " That we should take good heed 
to God's Word, as unto a bght that shineth in darkness." 

God Almighty, the Father of our loving Lord and Saviour 
Jesus Christ, grant his holy spirit, that Christian kings and 
princes, cities and towns, may acknowledge these unspeakable 
benefits of the revealing again of the gospel, and the deliver- 
ance out of the Egyptian bondage, the kingdom of antichrist; 
and be heartily thankful to God for the same, and live there- 
after in holiness, and not drive away God's Word by con- 
temning thereof, and through sinful and wicked actions 
bereave ourselves and our posterity of the glorious liberty of 
the gospel, nor plunge ourselves into the distress and miser- 
able captivity of popish tyranny, under which our forefathers 
and predecessors suffered; but that this treasure and Depo- 
situm of God's Word may remain in Germany, and that this 
begun work may be sent forward, and proceed to God's glory, 
honour and praise, and to the preservation and salvation of 
the Christian church, throughout all the world. God of his 
infinite mercy grant this for Jesus Christ's sake. Amen. 

John Aurifaber, D.D. 
Anno 1D69. 



/ 



M E M O I li. 



Martin Luther, tlie illustrious German divine and reformer of 
the church, was the son of JohnLotter, or Lauther, (which name 
our reformer changed to Luther,) and of Margaret Lindeman, and 
was born at Eisleben, atown of Saxony, in the county of Mansfeldt, 
November 10th, 1483. His father's extraction and condition were 
originally but mean, and his occupation that of a miner ;* it is 
probable, how^ever, that by his application and industry he im- 
proved the circumstances of his family, for we find him after- 
wards raised to the magistracy of a considerable rank and dignity 
in his province. Luther was initiated very early into letters ; 
and, having learned the rudiments of grammar while he 
continued at home with his parents, was, at the age of thirteen, 
sent to a school at Magdeburg. Here he remained only one 
year, for the circumstances of his parents were at that time so 
very low, and so insufficient to maintain him, that he was forced, 
as Melchior Adam relates, " Mendicato vivere pane," to beg his 



* " I am a peasant's son, and my father, grandfather, and great- 
grandfather were all common peasants. My father went to 
Mansfeldt, where he got employment in the mines ; and there I 
was born. That I should ever become bachelor of arts, doctor 
of divinity, and what not, seemed not to be written in the stars. 
How 1 must have surprised folks by turning monk ; and then, 
again, by changmg the brown cap for another ! By so doing I 
occasioned real grief and trouble to my father. Afterwards I 
went to loggers with the pope, married a runaway nun, and had 
children by her. Who foresaw these things in the stars ? Who 
CJOuld have foretold that they were to come to pass?" 

c 2 



XXVI MEMOIR. 

bread for support * From Magdeburg he was removed to a 
scliool at Eisenach, a city of Thuringia, for the sake of being 
among his mother's relations ; his mother being descended 
from an ancient and reputable family in that town.f Here he 
applied himself diligently to study for four years ; and began to 
discover all that force and strength of parts, that acuteness and 
penetration, that warm and rapid eloquence, which afterwards 
produced such wonderful effects. 
/ In 1501 he was sent to the university oi Erfurt, where he went 
X, through the usual courses of logic and philosophy. But Luther 
did not find his account in these studies ; did not feel that use 
and satisfaction arising from such verbose and thorny sciences 
as logic and philosophy then were, which he wanted and 
wished to feel. He therefore applied himself to read the best 
ancient writers, such as Cicero, Virgil, Livy, &c., and from them 
laid in such a fund of good sense as enabled him to see through 
the defects in the systems of the schools, as well as the supersti- 
tions and errors of the church. He took a master's degree in 
the university when he was twenty ; and then read lectures upon 
Aristotle's physics, ethics, and other parts of philosophy. After- 
wards, at the instigation of his parents, he studied the civil law, 
with a view of advancing himself to the bar ; but was diverted 
from this pursuit by an event which he considered as admonitory. 



* We are told this by himseK: — " Let no one speak contemptu- 
ously before me of the poor ' companions,' who go about singing 
and crjmig at every door, Panem jpro'pter Deum I (bread for 
God's sake !) You know that the Psalm says — ' Princes and 
kings have sung.' I, myself, was once a poor mendicant, begging 
my bread from door to door, particularly in Eisenach, my own 
dear Eisenach!" 

t He obtained an asylum in the house of Dame Ursula, wife 
or widow of Hans Schweickardt, who took pity on the poor wan- 
dering boy ; and he was enabled by this charitable woman to 
study four years at Eisenach. In one of his works, Luther men- 
tions his benefactress in terms of the tenderest emotion. 



MEMOIR. XXVll 

and which, by wonderful gradations, led to his future eminence. 
Walking out into the fields one day, he was struck by light- 
ning, so as to fall to the ground, while a companion was killed by 
his side ; and this affected him so sensibly, that, without com- 
municating his purpose to any of his friends, he withdrew him- 
self from the world, and retired into the order of the hermits of 
St. Augustine. 
^ Here he employed himself in reading St. Augustine and the 
^ schoolmen ; but, in turning over the books of the library, he 
found a copy of the Latin Bible, which he had never seen before.* 



"5 



* '* I was twenty years old," saj^s Luther, "before I had ever 
seen the Bible. I had no notion that there existed any other 
gospels or epistles than those in the service. At last I came 
across a Bible in the library at Erfurt, and used often to read it 
to Dr. Staupitz, with still increasing wonder." "At that time 
(says Audin) every monastery in Germany had a library, partly 
composed of manuscripts, with beautiful illuminations heightened 
■with gold and silver ; laborious works, in which were reproduced 
the treasures of pagan antiquity, that but for the monks would 
have been for ever lost. Luther's most pleasant hours were 
spent in the library of the Augustinians of Erfurt. Thanks 
to Guttemberg, an humble mechanic, the industry of the con- 
ventual brethren was no longer necessary ; printing had been 
discovered. At Mentz and Cologne, the sacred books were 
published in every form and size. Tiie monastery had purchased 
at a large price some Latin bibles, which were reluctantly shown 
to visitors. Luther opened one, and his eyes rested with inex- 
pressible ecstasy on the story of Hannah and her son Samuel. 
' My God !' he said, ' I would seek no other wealth than a copy 
of this book. A mighty change was then wrought in his mind. 
Human language attired in poetry seemed to him contemptible 
in comparison with the inspired word ; he became disgusted with 
the study of the law, to which Hans, his father, had wished him 
to devote himself. How small in his sight became Jodocus 
Truttvetter, his master, who enjoyed a deserved reputation as a 
canonist, when compared with Moses, or still more with St. Paul. 
He was then twenty years old, and study had exhausted his 
strength ; he became ill. An aged priest came to confess him ; 
the youth was pale, wasted, and given up to thoughts which 



XXVIU MEMOIE. 

I 

This raised his curiosity to a high degree ; he read it over with 
great avidity, and was amazed to find what a small portion of the 
Scriptm*es was allowed to reach the ears of the people. He 
made his profession in the monastery of Erfurt, after he had 
been a novice one year ; and took priest's orders, and cele- 
brated his first mass in 1507.* The year after he was removed 
from the convent of Erfurt to the university of Wittemberg ; 
which being just founded, nothing was thought more likely to 
bring it into immediate credit than the authority and presence of 
a man so celebrated for his great parts and learning as Luther. 
Here he read pubhc lectures in philosophy for three years, not 
in that servile, dull, mechanical way in which lectures were 
usually read, but with so much active spirit and force of genius, 
as to make it presaged that a revolution might one day happen 
in the schools under his direction and management. 

In 1512, seven convents of his order having a quarrel with their 
yicar-general, Luther was chosen to go to Rome to maintain their 
cause. He was indeed a proper person for such employments j 



aggravated his complaint. 'Courage, my friend,' said the good 
priest to him, ' you will not die of this malady ; God preserves 
you for a great end ; he will make you a distinguished man, and 
you in your turn will comfort others, for God loves you, since he 
chastises you.' Doubtless, this confessor was no soothsayer, and 
little suspected the designs of Providence in regard to his patient." 
— Audin. 

* Let us hear his own confession of the feelings with which he 
entered : — '"' When I said my first mass at Erfurt, I was well 
nigh dead, for I was without faith. My only notion of myself 
was, that I was a very worthy person. I had no idea that I was 
a sinner. The first mass was an event always much looked to, 
and a considerable sum of money used to be collected. The hora 
canonicce were borne in with large torches. The dear young lord, 
as the peasants used to call their new pastor, had then to dance 
with his mother, if she happened to be alive, whilst the by- 
standers wept tears of joy ; if she were dead, he put her, as the 
phrase ran, under the communion-cup, and saved her from pur- 
gatory." 



MEMOIR. XXIX 

for he was a man of a most firm and steady temper, with a share 
of natural conrage which nothing could subdue. At Rome he 
saw the pope and the court, and had an opportunity of observing 
also the manners of the clergy, whose hasty, superficial, and im- 
pious way of celebrating mass he has severely noted. " I per- 
formed mass," says he, " at B^me ; I saw it also performed by 
others, but in such a manner that I never think of it ig^ithout the 
utmost horror." He often spoke afterwards with great plea- 
sure of his journey to Bome J and used to say that herr' would 
not but have made it for a thousand florins." As soon as he had 
adjusted the dispute which was the business of his journey, he 
returned to Wittemberg, and was created doctor of divinity, at 
the expense of Frederic, elector of Saxony, who had often heard 
him preach, was perfectly acquainted with his merit, and reve- 
renced him hig]ily. Luther, it appears, at fii'st declined tha 
honour of this degree on account of his being, in his own opinion, 
too young, for he was only in his thirtieth year ; but he was 
told that " he must suffer himself to be dignified, for that God 
intended to bring about great things in the church by his 
means ;" which, though it was certainly said in jest, proved at 
length a very serious truth. 

He continued in. the university of Wittemberg, where, as pro- 
fessor of divinity, he employed himself in the business of his 
calling. The university, as we have observed, had been lately 
founded by Frederic, elector of Saxony, who was one of the 
richest and most powerful princes at that time in Grermany, as 
weU as. one of the most magnificent and bountiful ; and who 
brought a great many learned men thither, by large pensions and 
other encouragements, and amongst the rest Luther. Here then 
he began in the most earnest manner to read lectures upon the 
sacred books : he explained the epistle to the Romans, and the 
Psalms, which he cleared up and illustrated in a manner so en- 
tirely new, and so diflerent from what had been j)ursued by former 



XXX MEMOIR. 

commentators, tliat " there seemed, after a long and dark nighf^ 
a new day to arise, in the judgment of all pious and prudent 
men." He settled the precise difference between the law and 
gospel, which before had been confounded ; refuted many errors, 
commonly received both in the church and the schools; and 
brought many necessary truths to light, which might have been 
vainly sought in Scotus and Aquinas. The better to quahfy 
himself for the task he had undertaken, he apphed himself 
attentively to the Greek and Hebrew languages ; to which, we 
are told, he was particularly excited by the writings of Erasmus ; 
who, though he always remained in appearance a Papist, or at 
least, had nothing decided in his character, yet contributed much 
to the dispelling of monkish ignorance, and overthrowing the 
kingdom of darkness. In the mean time, Luther, while he was 
active in propagating truth and instruction by his lectures and 
sermons, maintained an exemplary severity in his life and con- 
versation, and was a most rigid observer of that discipline which 
he enjoined to others. This gained him vast credit and authority, 
and made all he delivered, however new or unusual, more readily 
accepted by those who heard him. 

In this manner was he employed when the general Indulgences 
were published in 1517. Leo X., who succeeded Juhus II. in 
March, 1513, formed a design of building the magnificent church 
of St. Peter's at Rome, which was, indeed, begun by Juhus II., 
but still requu^ed very large sums to be finished. The treasure 
ot the apostolic chamber was much exhausted, and the pope 
himself, though of a rich and powerful family, was far from 
being able to do it at his own proper charge, on account of the 
excessive debts he had contracted before his advancement to the 
popedom.* There was nothing new in the method of raising 



* Leo X. had begun his pontificate by selling to Francis I., what \ 
did not belong to him, the rights of the Church of France ; and ; 



me:moir. XXXI 

money by indulgences. This had been formerly on several occa- 
sions practised by the court of Kome ; and none had been found 
more effectual. Leo, therefore, in 1517, published general indul- 
gences throughout all Europe, in favour of those who would 
contribute any sum to the building of St. Peter's ; and appointed 
persons in different countries to preach up these indulgences, and 
to receive money for them. Albert of Brandenburg, archbishop 
of Mentz and Magdeburg, who was soon after made a cardinal, 
had a commission for Germany ; and Luther assures us that he 
was to have half the money that was to be raised, which does not 
seem improbable, for Albert's court was at that time very 
luxurious and splendid ; and he had borrowed 30,000 florins of 
that opulent family the Fuggers of Augsburg, to pay the pope 
for the bulls of his archbishopric, which sum he was bound to 
repay. Be this however as it will, Albert gave out this com- 
mission to John Tetzel, or Tecelius, a Dominican friar, and 
others of his order. These indulgences were immediately ex- 
posed to sale ; and Tetzel boasted of " having so large a com- 
mission from the pope, that though a man should have deflowered 
the Virgin Mary, yet for money he might be pardoned." He 
added further, that " he did not only give pardon for sins past, 
but for sins to cc-me." A book came out also at the same time, 
under the sanction of the archbishop, in which orders were given 
to the commissioners and collectors to enforce and press the 



at a later period, as a means of raising money, he created thirty 
cardinals at once ; but these were trifling resources. He was 
not owner of the mines of Mexico ; his mines were the ancient 
faith of the people, their easy credulity ; and he had sold the right 
of working them in Germany to the Dominicans. The Domi- 
nican, Tetzel, an impudent mountebank, went about with great 
bustle, display, and expense, hawking his ware in the churches, 
public streets, and taverns. He paid over to his employers as 
little as possible, pocketing the balance, as the pope's legate 
proved against him some time after. 



XXXll MEMOIR. 

power of indulgences. These persons performed their offices 
with great zeal indeed, but not with sufficient judgment and 
policy. They over-acted their parts, so that the people, to whom 
they were become very troublesome, saw through the cheat ; 
being at length convinced, that under a pretence of indulgences 
they only meant to plunder the Germans ; and that, far from 
being solicitous about saving the souls of others, their only view 
was to enrich themselves. 

These strange proceedings gave great offence at Wittemberg, 
and particularly inflamed the pious zeal of Luther, who, being 
naturally warm and active, and in the present case unable to 
repress his indignation, was determined to declare against them, 
whatever might be the consequence.* Upon the eve of All 



* It has been said by Father Paul, in his History of the 
Council of Trent, and after him by Hume, in his History of 
England, as well as by others, tljat the .Austin friars had been 
usually employed in preaching indulgences in Saxony ; and that 
Luther was prompted at first to oppose Tetzel and his associates, 
and to deny indulgences, by a desire of taking revenge for this 
injury offered to his order. Such was the representation of 
Bossuet ; and other writers, misled by his authority, have circu- 
lated a similar opinion. It is proper, therefore, to observe, that 
the publication of indulgences in Germany was not usually com- 
mitted to the Augustius : from 1229 that lucrative commission, 
was principally entrusted to the Dominicans, and they had been 
^jmployed in the same office a short time before the present 
period : the promulgation of them at three diflerent periods 
under Julius II. was granted to the Franciscans, and the 
guardian of the Franciscans was joined in the trust with Albert 
on this occasion, though he refused to accept it ; and it is re- 
markable that, for half a century before Luther — viz., from 1450 
to 1517 — the name of an Austin friar employed in this service 
occurs but once. To these facts it may be added, that it is far 
from being probable that Luther would have been solicitous 
about obtaining for himself or his order, a commission of this 
kind, at a time when the preaching of indulgences was become 
very unpopular ; when all the princes of Europe, and many 
bishops, as well as other learned men, abhorred the traffic ; and 



MEMOIR. XXXlll 

Saints, therefore, in 1517^ He publicly fixed up, at tlie churcli 
next to the castle of that town, a thesis upon indulgences ; in the 
beginning of which he challenged any one to oppose it, either by 
writing or disputation. This thesis contained ninety-five propo- 
sitions ; in which, however, he did not directly oppose indul- 
gences in themselves, nor the power of the church to grant 
them, but only maintained, " That the pope could release no 
punishments but what he inflicted, and indulgences could be 
nothing but a relaxation of ecclesiastical penalties ; that they 
affected only the living; that the dead were not subject to 
canonical penances, and so could receive no benefit by indul- 
gences ; and that such as were in purgatory could not by them 
be delivered from the punishment of their sins ; that indeed the 
pope did not grant indulgences to the souls of the dead, by virtue 
of the power of the keys, but by way of suffrage ; that indul- 
gences seldom remit all punishment ; that those who believe they 
shall be saved by indulgences only, shall be damned with their 
masters ; that contrition can procure remission of the fault and 
punishment without indulgences, but that indulgences can 
do nothing without contrition ; that the pope's indulgence 
is not to be condemned, because it is the declaration of a 
pardon obtained of God, but only to be preached up with cau- 
tion, lest the people should think it preferable to good works ; 
that Christians should be instructed, how much better it is to 



even the Franciscans and Dominicans, towards the conclusion of 
the fifteenth century, opposed it publicly, both in their dis- 
courses and writings : nor was this commission given to the 
Dominicans in general, but solely to Tetzel. Finally, Luther 
was never accused of opposing the publication of indulgences 
from resentment or envy, either in the edicts of the pontiffs of 
his time, or in the reproaches of his contemporary writers, who 
defended the cause of Eome from 1517 to 1546, and who were 
far from being sparing of their invectives and calumnies. See on 
this subject Mosheim and ^ohertson. ^/^ 



XXXir MEMOIB. 

abound in works of mercy and charity to the poor, than to pur. 
chase a pardon ; and that it is a matter of indifference either to 
buy, or not to buy, an indulgence ; that indulgences are not to 
be trusted to ; that it is hard to say what that treasure of the 
church is, which is said to be the foundation of indulgences ; 
that it is not the merits of Christ or his saints, because they 
produce grace in the inner man, and crucify the outward man, 
without the pope's interposing ; that this treasure can be nothing 
but the power of the keys, or the gospel of the glory and grace 
of God ; that indulgences cannot remit the most venial sin in 
respect of the guilt ; that they remit nothing to them who by a 
sincere contrition have a right to a perfect remission ; and that 
Christians are to be exhorted to seek pardon of their sins by the 
pains and labour of penance, rather than to get them discharged 
without reason." 

This is the doctrine of Luther's thesis ; in which, if he does 
not attack indulgences directly, he certttinly repre^FntS'them as 
useless and ineffectual. He also condemns in it several proposi- 
tions which he attributes to his adversaries, and inveighs against 
several abuses of which he affirms them guilty, as for example, 
*' The reserving ecclesiastical penances for purgatory, or com- 
muting them into the pains of purgatory ; teaching that indul- 
gences free men from all the guilt and punishment of sin; 
preaching that the soul, which they please to release out of pur- 
gatory, flies immediately to heaven when the money is cast into 
the chest ; maintaining, that these indulgences are an inestimable 
gift, by which man is reconciled to God ; exacting from the poor, 
contrary to the pope's intentions ; causing the preaching of the 
word of God to cease in other churches that they may have a 
greater concourse of people in those where indulgences are 
preached ; advancing this scandalous assertion, that the pope's 
indulgences have such a virtue, as to be able to absolve a man 
though he has ravished the mother of God, which is a thing 



MEMOIE. XXXV 

impossible ; pnblisliinfr, that the cross with the arms of the pope, 
is equal to the cross of Christ, &c. Such positions as these," 
says he, "have made people ask, and justly, why the pope, out 
of charity, does not deliver all souls out of purgatory, since he 
can deliver so great a number for a little money, given for the 
building of a church ? Why he suffers prayers and anniver- 
saries for the dead, which are certainly delivered out of purga- 
tory by indulgences ? Why the pope, who is richer than several 
Croesuses, cannot build the church of St. Peter with his own 
money, but at the expense of the poor?" cfcc. In thus attacking 
indulgences, and the commissioners appointed to publish them, 
Luther seemed to attack Albert, the archbishop of Mentz, under 
whose name and authority they were published. Of this he was 
himself aware ; and, therefore, the very eve on which he fixed 
up his thesis, he wrote a letter to him,* in which, after humbly 



* The following are extracts from the letter : — " Venerable 
father in Christ, most illustrious prince, vouchsafe to cast a 
favourable eye on me, who am but dust and ashes, and to 
receive my request with pastoral kindness. Persons are now 
hawking throughout the country, under the name and august 
title of your highness, papal indulgences for the erection of the 
cathedral of St. Peter's at Eome. I say nothing about the 
vapourings which I have not myself heard, but I complain bit- 
terly of the preachers, the fatal errors in which they are in- 
fluencing the poor, simple, and unlearned, who are everywhere 
openly avowing their fond imaginations on the subject. This 
pains and sickens me . . . They believe that souls will be de- 
livered from purgatory as soon as their money clinks in the 
preacher's bag. They believe the indulgence to be powerful 
enough to save the greatest sinner, even one (such is their blas- 
phemy) who might have violated the holy mother of our Saviour ! 
. . . Great God ! these poor souls, then, are to be led, under 
your authority, to death and not to life. You will incur a fearful 

and heavily-increasing responsibility Be pleased, noble 

and venerable father, to read and take into consideration my 
Propositions, showing the vanity of the indulgences which the 
preachers proclaun as a certainty." 



XXXVl MEMOIB. 

representing to him the grievances just recited, he besought him 
to remedy and correct them : and concluded with imploring 
pardon for the freedom he had taken, protesting that what he 
did was out of duty, and with a faithful and submissive temper 
of mind. 

Luther's propositions concerning indulgences were no sooner 
published, than Tetzel, the Dominican friar and commissioner for 
selling them, maintained and published at Prankfart, a thesis 
containing a set of propositions directly contrary to them. He 
also stirred up the clergy of his order against Luther ; anathe- 
matized him from the pulpit as a most damnable heretic ; and 
burnt his thesis publicly at Frankfurt. Eight hundred copies 
of Tetzel's thesis were also burnt in return by some persons at 
Wittemberg ; but Luther himself disowned having had any hand 
in that procedure, and in a letter to Jodocus, a professor at 
Eisenach, who had formerly been his master, asked him, " If ht 
thought Luther so void of common sense as to do a thing of tha' 
kind in a place where he had not any jurisdiction, and against a 
divine of so great authority as Tetzel?" Luther, indeed, although 
he perceived tliat his propositions were very well liked, and 
entertained as perfectly sound and orthodox, yet behaved him- 
self at first with great calmness and submission. He proposed 
them to be discussed only in the way of disputation, till the 
church should determine what was to be thought of indulgences. 
He wrote to Jerome of Brandenburg, under whose jurisdiction he 
was, and submitted what he had written to that bishop's judg- 
ment. He entreated him either to scratch out with his pen, or 
commit to the flames, whatever should seem to him unsound ; 
to which, however, the bishop replied, that he only begged him 
to defer the publication of his propositions ; and added, that he 
wished no discourse had been started about indulgences. Luther 
complied with the bishop's request ; and declared that " it gave 
him more pleasure to be obedient, than it would to work miracles, 



MEMOIE. TXXVU 

if he was ever so able." And so mucli justice must be done to 
Luther, even by those who are not of his party, as to acknow- 
ledge that he was willing to be silent, and to say nothing more 
of indulgences, provided the same conditions might be imposed 
upon his adversaries. 

But the spirit of peace deserted the church for a season ; and 
a quarrel begun by two private monks, ended as we shall see, in 
a mighty revolution. Luther was now attacked by adversaries 
innumerable from all sides ; three of the principal of whom were, 
John Eckius, divinity -professor and vice-chancellor of the uni- 
versity of Ingolstadt, who wrote notes upon his thesis, which 
Luther answered by other notes ; Sylvester Prierius, or Prierio, 
a Dominican, and master of the holy palace ; and one Jacob 
Hogostratus, a friar-preacher, who singled out some of his pro- 
positions, and advised the pope to condemn and burn him, if he 
would not immediately retract them. Luther contented himself 
with publishing a kind of manifesto against Hogostratus, in 
which he reproaches him with cruelty and ignorance ; but as 
Prierius had drawn up his animadversions in the form of a dia- 
logue, to which was prefixed a dedication to the pope, and built 
all he had advanced against Luther upon the principles of Thomas 
Aquinas, Luther in an epistle to the reader, opposed Holy Scrip- 
ture to the authority of this saint ; and declared among other 
things, that " if the pope and the cardinals were, like this 
Dominican, to set up any authority against that of Scripture, it 
could no longer be doubted that Home was itself the very seat of 
antichrist ; and then happy would Bohemia and all other coun- 
tries be, who should separate themselves from it as soon as 
possible." 

In 1518, Luther, though dissuaded from it by his friends, yet, 
to show his obedience to authority, went to the monastery of St. 
Augustine at Heidelberg, while the chapter was held ; and here 
maintained, April 26th, a dispute concerning "justification by 



XXXVlll MEMOIR. 

faith," wliicli Bucer, wlio was present, took down in writing, and 
afterwards communicated to Beatus Elienanus, not without the 
highest commendations. Luther has given an account of this 
dispute, and says, that " the doctors there opposed him with 
such moderation and good manners, that he could not but think 
the better of them for it. And although the doctrine he main- 
tained was perfectly new to tliem, yet they all acquitted them- 
selves very acutely, except one of the juniors, who created much 
mirth and laughter by observing, that if the country people were 
to hear what strange positions were admitted, they would cer- 
tainly stone the whole assembly." 

In the mean time, the zeal of his adversaries grew every day 
more active against him ; and he was at length accused to Leo X. 
as an heretic. As soon as he returned therefore from Heidel- 
berg, he wrote a letter to that pope, in the most submissive 
terms ; and sent him at the same time an explication of his pro- 
positions about indulgences. He tells his holiness in this letter, 
that " he was greatly troubled at being represented to him as a 
person who opposed the authority and power of the keys and 
pope ; that this accusation amazed him, but that he trusted to 
his own innocence." Then he sets forth the matter of fact, and 
says, that the " preachers of the jubilee thought all things 
lawful for them under the pope's name, and taught ^leretical and 
impious propositions, to the scandal and contempt of the eccle- 
siastical power, and as if the decretals against the abuses of col- 
lectors did not concern them ; that they had pubhshed books, in 
which they taught the same impieties and heresies, not to men- 
tion their avarice and exactions ; that they had found out no 
other way to quiet the offence their ill conduct had given, than 
by terrifying men with the name of pope, and by threatening 
with fire, as heretics, all those who did not approve and submit 
to their exorbitances ; that being animated with a zeal for Jesus 
Christ, and pushed on by the heat of youth, he had given notice 



MEMOIB. XXXIX 

of these abuses to the superior powers ; whose not regarding it 
had induced him to oppose them with lenity, by publishing a 
position which he invited the most learned to dispute with him. 
This," says he, " is the flame which they say has set the whole 
world on fire. Is it that I have not a right, as a doctor of divinity, 
to dispute in the public schools upon these matters ? These 
theses were made only for my own country ; and I am surprised 
to see them spread into all parts of the world. They were rather 
disputable points than decisions ; some of them obscure, and in 
need of being cleared. What shall I do ? I cannot withdraw 
them, and yet I see I am made odious. It is a trouble to me to 
appear in public, yet I am constrained to do it. It is to appease 
my adversaries, and give satisfaction to several persons, that I have 
published explications of the disputes I have engaged in ; which I 
now do under the protection of your holiness, that it may be known 
how sincerely I honour the power of the keys, and with what 
injustice my adversaries have represented me. If I were such a 
one as they give out, the elector of Saxony would not have 
tolerated me in his university thus long." He concludes in the 
following words : " I cast myself, holy father, at your feet, with 
all I am and have. Give me life, or put me to death ; confirm or 
revoke, approve or disapprove, as you please. I own your voice 
as that of Jesus Christ, who rules and speaks by you ; and if I 
have deserved death I refuse not to die." This letter is dated 
Trinity Sunda}", 1518, and was accompanied with a protestation, 
in which he declared, that " he did not pretend to advance or 
defend anything contrary to the Holy Scripture, or to the doc- 
trine of the fathers, received and observed by the church of 
Home, or to the canons and decretals of the popes ; nevertheless, 
he thought he had the Hberty, either to approve or disapprove 
the opinions of St. Thomas, Bonaventure, and other schoolmen 
and canonists, which are not grounded upon any text." 

The Emperor Maximilian was equally solicitous with the pcpe 
d 



xl MEMOIR. 

about putting a stop to the propagation of Luther's opinions in 
Saxony ; since the great number of his followers, and the resolu- 
tion with which he defended them, made it evident beyond dis- 
pute, that if he were not immediately cheeked, he would become 
troublesome both to the church and empire. Maximilian there- 
fore applied to Leo in a letter dated August 5th, 1518, and begged 
him to forbid by his authority, these useless, rash, and danger- 
ous disputes ; assuring him also that he would strictly execute in 
the empire whatever his holiness should enjoin.* The pope on 
his part ordered Jerome de Genutiis, bishop of Ascula, or Ascoli, 
auditor of the apostolic chamber, to cite Luther to appear at 
Eome within sixty days, that he might give an account of his 
doctrine to the auditor and master of the palace, to whom he had 
committed the judgment of that cause. He wrote at the same 
time to Frederic, the elector of Saxony, to pray him not to pro- 
tect Luther ; and let him know that he had cited him, and had 
given Cardinal Cajetan, his legate in German}^ the necessary 
instructions upon that occasion. He exhorts the elector to put 



* At the same time, however, he recommended the papal court 
not to precipitate matters, but in vain, as tlie zeal of Maximilian 
was somewhat mistrusted at Home ; for certain sayings of his had 
travelled thither, which sounded ill in the pope's ear. " What 
your monk is doing, is not to be regarded with contempt," the 
emperor had said to Pfeffinger, the elector of Saxony's minister ; 
*'' the game is about to begin with the priests. Make much of 
him ; it may be that we may want him." More than once he 
had indulged in bitter complaints against the priests and clergy. 
"This pope," said he, speaking of Leo X., "has acted towards 
me like a knave. I can truly say that I have never met with 
sincerity or good faith in any pope ; but, with God's blessing, I 
trust this will be the last." This was threatening language ; 
and it was recollected moreover that Maximilian, by way of de- 
finitively settling the dispute between the empire and the holy 
see, had entertained the idea of making himself pope. Leo X., 
therefore, took good care not to make him umpire in this dis« 
pute, which was daily assuming fresh importance. 



MEMOTE. xll 

Luther into the hands of this legate, that he might be carried to 
Eome ; assuring him that, if he were innocent, he would send him 
back absolved, and if he were guilty, would pardon him upon his 
repentance. This letter to Frederic was dated August 23rd, 1518, 
and it was by no means unnecessary ; for though Luther had 
nothing to trust to at first but his own personal qualities, his 
parts, his learning, and his courage, yet he was afterwards coun- 
tenanced and supported by this elector, a prince of great per- 
sonal worth * At the same time, also, the pope sent a brief to 
Cardinal Cajetan, in which he ordered him to bring Luther 
before him as soon as possible ; and to hinder the princes from 
being any impediment to the execution of this order, he de- 
nounced the punishments of excommunication, interdiction, and 
privation of goods against all who should receive Luther and give 



* Luther's hopes lay in the elector's protection. Either out of 
regard for his new university or personal attachment to Luther, 
this prince had always shown him peculiar favour. He had 
undertaken to defray the expenses of his doctor's degree ; and 
in 1517, Luther thanks him by letter for a present of cloth to 
make a gown for the winter, Luther felt pretty sure, too, that 
the elector would not be offended with him for getting up an 
excitement, which laid all the blame upon the archbishop of 
Mentz and Magdeburg, a prince of the house ot Brandenburg, 
and, consequently, an enemy to that of Saxony. Finally (and 
this was a powerful motive to inspire him with confidence), the 
elector had announced that he recognised no other rule of faith 
than the actual words of Scripture. Luther reminded him of 
this in the following passage (March 27th, 1519) : — " Dr. Stau- 
pitz, my true father in Christ, told me that, talking one day 
with your electoral highness respecting those preachers who, 
instead of declaring the pure word of God, preach to the people 
nothing but wretched quibbles or human traditions, you said to 
him that the Hol}^ Scripture speaks with such majesty and fidness 
of evidence as to need no adventitious aid of polemics, compelling 
one to admit, ' never man spoke like this man. He does not 
teach like the Scribes and Pharisees, but as one having autho- 
rity.' " 

d2 



xlii MEMOTE. 

him protection ; and promised a plenary indulgence to those who 
should assist in delivering him up. 

In the mean time, Luther, as soon as he understood what was 
transacting about him at Eome, used all imaginable means to pre- 
vent his being carried thither, and to obtain a hearing of his 
cause in Germany. The university of Wittemberg interceded 
for him, and wrote a letter to the pope to excuse him from going 
to Rome, because his health would not permit it ; and assured his 
holiness that he had asserted nothing contrary to the doctrine of 
the church, and that all they could charge him with was his laying 
down some propositions in disputation too freely, though without 
any view of deciding upon them. The elector also was against 
Luther's going to Rome, and desired of Cardinal Cajetan, that 
he might be heard before him, as his legate in Germany. Upon 
these addresses, the pope consented that the cause should be 
tried before Cardinal Cajetan, to whom he had given power to 
decide it. Luther, therefore, set off immediately for Augsburg, 
poor, and on foot, as he says in his narrative, and carried with 
him letters from the elector* He arrived here in October, 1518^ 



* On the eve of his departure on this expedition, so hazardous 
to himself and so important in its consequences to the world, he 
wrote a short letter to his intimate friend, Melancthon, which 
strongly marks the intrepidity of his character : — " I know no- 
thing new or extraordinary here," says he, " except that I am 
become the subject of conversation throughout the whole city, 
and that every one wishes to see the man who is to be the victim 
of such a conflagration. You will act your part properly, as you 
have always done ; and teach the youth intrusted to your care. 
I go, for you, and for them, to be sacrificed if it should so please 
God. I rather choose to perish, and, what is more afflicting, to 
be for ever deprived even of your society, than to retract what I 
have already justly asserted, or to be the means of affording the 
stupid adversaries of all liberal studies an opportunity of accom- 
plishing their purpose." — Roscoes Leo 2C. (Bohn's edit., ii. 98.) 

Luther set out at daybreak from Wittemberg, on foot, without 
a penny in his pocket, and dressed in a threadbare gown. Great 



MEMOIR. xliii 

and upon an assurance of his safety, was admitted into tlie car- 
dinal's presence. The legate told liim that he did not intend to 
enter into any dispute with him, but should only propound three 
things to him, on the pope's behalf; and he did admonish him, 
"First, to become a sound member of the church, and to recant 
his errors ; secondly, to promise that he would not teach such 
pernicious doctrines for the future ; and thirdly, to take care that 
the peace of the church was not broken by his means." Luther 
beseeched the legate to acquaint him what his errors were, who 
alleged to him a decretal of Clement VI. in which " the merits of 
Jesus Christ are affirmed to be a treasure of indulgences," which 
he the said Luther denied ; and objected to him also his teaching 
that " faith was necessary for all who should receive the sacra- 
ment, so as to obtain any benefit by it." Luther replied, that 
"he had read the decretal of Clement, which the legate alleged ; 
but did humbly conceive that it was not of sufficient authority to 
retract any opinion which he believed to be conformable to Holy 
Scripture." The legate then had recourse to the authority of the 
pope, who, he said, " could only decide upon the sense of Scrip- 
ture ;" upon which Luther desired time to deliberate upon what 
the legate had proposed to him, and so the dispute ended for, 
that day. 

The next day, (October 12th,) Luther returned to a second 
conference with the legate, accompanied with four counsellors 
of the empire and a notary ; and brought wdth him a pro- 
testation, in which he declared that " he honoured and would 
obey the holy church of Rome in all things : that if he had said 



and small, clergy and laymen, were waiting to take leave of him 
at the gates. When he appeared, they cried — " Luther for ever !" 
" Christ for ever, and his word !" replied Martin. Some of the 
crowd quitted the crowd, and did homage to the pilgrim. 
" Courage, master," said they, " and God help you !" •' Amen!" 
replied Luther. — Audin. 



xliv MEMOIE. 

or done anything contrary to its decisions, he desired it might be 
looked upon as never said or done j" and for the three proposi- 
tions made to him by the legate, he declared, " That, having 
sought only the truth, he had committed no fault, and could not 
retract errors of which he had not been convinced, nor even 
heard ; that he was firmly persuaded of his having advanced 
nothing contrary to Scripture and the doctrines of the fathers ; 
that nevertheless, being a man and subject to error, he would 
submit himself to the lawful determination of the church; and 
that he offered, further, to give reasons in that place and else- 
where of what he had asserted, answer the objections, and hear 
the opinions of the doctors of the famous universities of Basil, 
Friburg, Louvain," &c. The legate only repeated what he had 
said the day before about the authority of the pope, and exhorted 
Luther again to retract. Luther answered nothing, but pre- 
sented a writing to the legate, which, he said, contained all he 
had to answer. The legate received the writing, but paid no 
regard to it ; he pressed Luther to retract, threatening him with 
the censures of the church if he did not ; and commanded him 
not to appear any more in his presence unless he brought his 
recantation with him. Luther was now convinced that he had 
more to fear from the cardinal's power than from disputations of 
any kind; and therefore, apprehensive of being seized if he did 
not submit, withdrew from Augsburg upon the 20th.* But, before 
his departure, he published a formal appeal to the pope, in which 



* Luther quitted Augsburg in haste. Staupitz had provided a 
horse and a guide who knew the country well. A magistrate of 
Augsburg, Langemantel, led him in the night, through the by- 
streets, to a small gate which opened on the ramparts, and there 
took leave of him. Luther had not even taken time to don his 
breeches or his shoes. Next day a monk, by order of the prior 
of the Carmelites, who had himself made haste to escape, affixed 
the appeal to the gates of the monastery. — Audin. 



MEilOIB. xlv 

he declared, that "-though he had submitted to be tried by Car- 
dinal Cajetan, as his legate, yet he had been so borne down and 
injured by him that he was constrained at length to appeal to 
the judgment of his holiness." He wrote hk'ewise a letter to the 
cardinal, and told him that " he did not think himself bound to 
continue any longer at Augsburg ; that he would retire after he 
had made his appeal ; that he would always submit himself to 
the judgment of the church ; but for his censures, that as he had 
not deserved, so he did not value them." 

Though Luther was a man of invincible courage, yet he was 
animated in some measure to these firm and vigorous proceed- 
ings by an assurance of protection from Frederic of Saxony ; 
being persuaded, as he says in his letter to the legate, that an 
appeal would be more agreeable to that elector than a recanta- 
tion. On this account, the first thing which the legate did, after 
Luther's departure, was to send an account to the elector of what 
had passed at Augsburg, He complained that Luther left him 
without taking leave, and without his knowledge ; and although 
he had given him hopes that he would retract and submit, yet had 
retired without afibrding him the least satisfaction. He ac- 
quainted the elector that Luther had advanced and maintained 
several propositions of a most damnable nature, and contrary to 
the doctrine of the holy see. He prays him to discharge his 
conscience, and to keep unspotted the honour of his illustrious 
house, by either sending him to Eome, or banishing him from 
his dominions. He assured him that this matter could not con- 
tinue long as it was at present, but would soon be prosecuted at 
liome ; and that, to get it out of his own hands, he had written 
to the pope about it. When this letter (Oct. 25th, 1518) was 
delivered to the elector, he communicated it to Luther, who im- 
mediately drew up a defence of himself against it. In this 
defence he ofiers to the elector to leave his country, if his high- 
ness thought proper, that he mijht be more at liberty to defend 



xlvi MEMOIR. 

himself against the papal authority, without bringing any incon- 
veniences upon his highness by that means.* But his friends 
advised him very wisely to remain in Saxony; and the university 
of Wittemberg presented an address to the elector, praying him 
to afford Luther so much favour and protection that he might 
not be obliged to recant his opinions, till it was made appear that 
they ought to be condemned. But this address was needless ; 
the elector was resolved not to desert Luther, and told the legate 
in an answer, Dec. 18th, that he "hoped he would have dealt 
with Luther in another manner, and not have obhged him to 
recant before his cause was heard and judged; and that there 
were several men in his own and in other universities who did not 
think Luther's doctrine either impious or heretical ; that if he 
had believed it such, there would have been no need of admo- 
nishing him not to tolerate it ; that Luther not being convicted 
of heresy, he could not banish him from his states, nor send him 
to Eome ; and that, since Luther offered to submit himself to 
the judgment of the universities, he thought they ought to hear 
him, or at least show him the errors which he taught in his 
writings." Luther, seeing himself thus supported, continued to 
teach the same doctrines at Wittemberg, and sent a challenge to 
all the inquisitors to come and dispute with him ; offering them 
not only a safe conduct from his prince, but assuring them also of 
good entertainment, and that their charges should be borne so 
long as they remained in Wittemberg. 

While these things passed in Germany, Leo attempted to put 
an end to these disputes about indulgences, by a decision of his 



* His letter rims thus : — " To avoid involving your highness 
in any danger, I wiD. quit your dominions, and go whithersoever 
God in his mercy shall conduct me, confiding myself in all things 
to his divine will. I therefore humbly offer my respects to your 
highness ; and among whatsoever people I may take my abode, 
I shall remember your kindness with unceasing gratitude." 



MEMOIR. Xlvii 

own ; and for that purpose, November 9th, published a brief 
directed to Cardinal Cajetan, in which he declared that " the 
pope, the successor of St. Peter, and vicar of Jesus Christ upon 
earth, hath power to pardon, by virtue of the keys, the guilt and 
punishment of sin, the guilt by the sacrament of penance, and 
the temporal punishments due for actual sins by indulgences ; 
that these indulgences are taken from the overplus of the merits 
of Jesus Christ and his saints, a treasure at the pope's own dis- 
posal as well by way of absolution as suffrage ; and that the 
dead and the living, who properly and truly obtain these indul- 
gences, are immediately freed from the punishment due to their 
actual sins, according to the divine justice, which allows these 
indulgences to be granted and obtained." This brief ordains, 
that " all the world shall hold and preach this doctrine, under the 
pain of excommunication reserved to the pope ; and enjoins Car- 
dinal Cajetan to send it to all the archbishops and bishops of 
Germany, and cause it to be put into execution by them." 
Luther knew very well that after this judgment made by the 
pope, he could not possibly escape being proceeded against, and 
condemned at Rome ; and therefore, upon the 28th of the same 
month, pubHshed a new appeal from the pope to a general coun- 
cil, in which he asserts the superior authority of the latter over 
the former. The pope, foreseeing that he should not easily 
manage Luther so long as the elector of Saxony continued to 
support and protect him, sent the elector a golden rose, such an 
one as he used to bless every year, and send to several princes as 
marks of his particular favour to them, Miltitius, or Miltitz, hia 
chamberlain, who was a German, was entrusted with this com- 
mission ; by whom the pope sent also letters in Jan. 1519 to the 
elector's counsellor and secretary, in which he prayed those 
ministers to use aU possible interest with their master, that he 
woTild stop the progress of Luther's errors, and imitate therein 
the piety of his ancestors. It appears by Seckendorf 's account 



Xlvm MEMOIE. 

of Miltitz's negotiation, that Frederic had long solicited for this 
bauble from the pope ; and that three or four years before, when 
his electoral highness was a bigot to the court of Bome, it had 
probably been a most welcome present. But it was now too 
late : Luther's contests with the see of Rome had opened the 
elector's eyes, and enlarged his mind j and therefore, when Mil- 
titz delivered his letters, and discharged his commission, he was 
received but coldly by the elector, wlio valued not the conse- 
crated rose, nor would receive it publicly and in form, but only 
privately, and by his proctor ; and to the remonstrances of Mil- 
titz respecting Luther, answered that he would not act as a 
judge, nor oppress a man whom he had hitherto considered as 
innocent. It is thought that the death of the emperor Maximi- 
lian, who expired on the 12th of this month, greatly altered the 
face of affairs, and made the elector more able to determine 
Luther's fate. Miltitz thought it best, therefore, to try what 
could be done by fair and gentle means, and to that end came 
to a conference with Luther. He poured forth many commenda- 
tions upon him, and earnestly entreated him that he would 
himself appease that tempest which could not but be destructive 
to the church. He blamed, at the same time, the behaviour and 
conduct of Tetzel, whom he called before him, and reproved with 
so much sharpness that he died of melancholy a short time after. 
Luther, amazed at all this civil treatment, which he had never before 
experienced, commended Miltitz highly, owned that if they had 
behaved to him so at first, all the troubles occasioned by these 
disputes had been avoided ; and did not forget to cast the blame 
upon Albert, Archbishop of Mentz, who had increased these trou- 
bles by his severity. Miltitz also made some concessions ; as 
that the people had been seduced by false opinions about indul- 
gences, that Tetzel had given the occasion, that the archbishop 
had employed Tetzel to get money, that Tetzel had exceeded the 
bounds of his commission, &c. This mildness and seeming can- 



MEMOI.l. xlix 

dour on the part of Miltitz gained so vronderfully upon Luther 
that he wrote a most submissive letter to the pope, on March 13th, 
1519. Miltitz, however, taking for granted that they would 
not be contented at Eome with this lv>tter of Luther's, written, 
as it was, in general terms only, propos »d to refer the matter to 
some other judgment ; and it was agreed between them that the 
elector of Triers should be the judge, and '^oblentz the place of 
conference; but this came to nothing: for Luther afterwards 
gave some reasons for not going to Coblentz, anl the pope would 
not refer the matter to the elector of Triers. 

During all these treaties, the doctrine of Luther spread and 
prevailed ; and he himself received great encouragement- at home 
and abroad. The Bohemians about this time sent him a book of 
the celebrated John Huss, who had fallen a martyr in the work 
of reformation ; and also letters, in which they exliorted him to 
constancy and perseverance, owning that the theology which 
he taught was pure, sound, and orthodox. Many great and 
learned men had joined themselves to him : among the rest 
Philip Melancthon, whom Prederic had invited to the uni- 
versity of Wittemberg in August, 1518, and Andrew Carlstadt, 
archdeacon of that town, who was a great linguist. They 
desired, if possible, to draw over Erasmus to their party ; and to 
that end we find Melancthon thus expressing himself in a letter to 
that great man, dated Leipsig, Jan. 5th, 1519 : — " Martin Luther, 
who has a very great esteem for you, wishes of all things that 
you would thoroughly approve of him;" and Luther himself 
wrote to Erasmus in very respectful and even flattering terms. 
The elector of Saxony was desirous also to know Erasmus's 
opinion of Luther, and might probably think, that as Erasmus 
had most of the monks for his enemies, and some of those who 
were warmest against Luther, he might easily be prevailed on to 
come over to their party. It would, indeed, have been a consi- 
derable object if they could have gained this point ; for the 



1 ?4:emoie. 

reputation of Erasmus was so-great, tliat if he at once declared 
for Luther, almost all Germany would have declared along with^ 
him. 

But Erasmus, whatever he might think of Luther's opinions, 
had neither his impetuosity nor his courage.* He contented 
himself, therefore, with acting and speaking in his usual strain 
of moderation, and v^Tote a letter to the elector Frederic, in 
which he declared ' his dislike of the arts which were employed 
to make Luther odious ; that he did not know Luther, and so 
could neither aj^)prove nor condemn his writings, because indeed 
he had not read them ; that however he condemned the railing 
at him w^ di so much violence, because he had submitted himself 
to the judgment of those whose office it was to determine, and 
no man had endeavoured to convince him of his error ; that his 
antagonists seemed rather to seek his death than his salvation ; 
that they mistook the matter in supposing that all error is 



* The following letter, written by Luther to Erasmus five 
years later (i.e., 1524), brings out in strong colours the opinion 
the Keformer entertained respecting the character and conduct 
of the Philosopher of Rotterdam : — "I have remained silent 
long enough, dear Erasmus ; charity commands me to set 
you the example. I have waited month after month in the 
expectation that you, as my superior, would be the first 
to renew our correspondence ; as you have not done so, 
charity commands me to do so. I do not reproach you with 
having kept aloof from us through fear of embarrassing the 
cause which you abetted against our enemies, the papists ; in- 
deed, the only vexation I feel is your having harassed us with 
some sharp stings and bites in various passages of the works 
which you have published, to catch their favour or mitigate their 
anger. We have seen clearly enough that the Lord has not 
yet granted you sufficient energy and direction of mind to attack 
these monsters freely and courageously, and we are not the men 
who would exact from you efforts above your strength. We 
have respected in you the will of God, who has meted out to you 
in this respect but limited gifts. On the other hand, there is 
no one can deny that it is you who have mainly contributed to 



MEMOIR. li 

heresy ; that there are errors in all the writings of both ancients 
and moderns ; that divines are of different opinions ; that it is 
more prudent to use moderate than violent means ; that the 
elector ought to protect innocence, and that this was the intent 
of Leo X." Erasmus wrote also a friendly letter in answer to 
Luther's, and told him that " his books had raised such an uproar 
at Louvam as it was not possible for him to describe ; that he 
could not have believed divines could have been such madmen if 
he had not been present and seen them with his eyes ; that, by 
defending him, he had rendered himself suspected ; that many 
abused him as the leader of this faction, so they call it ; that 
there were many in England, and some at Louvain, no inconsi- 
derable persons, who highly approved his opinions ; that, for his 
own part, he endeavoured to carry himself as evenly as he could 
with all parties, that he might more effectually serve the interests 
of learning and religion ; that, however, he thought more might 



the flourishing rise of letters we have witnessed, and which give 
so powerful an assistance to the right understanding of Scrip- 
ture ; the powers which God has given you in this respect are 
great, admirable, magnificent, and heartily do we thank him for 
bestowing them upon you. Impressed with these feelings, I 
have never desired to see you step beyond the limits assigned 
you by Providence, and come over to our camp. Great, 
doubtless, would be the services you could render us by your 
talent and eloquence ; but since your heart fails, better serve us 
in your own way. There was a fear that you might suffer your- 
self to be led away by our adversaries to attack our doctrine 
publicly, when I should feel bound to oppose you face to face ; 
and I have had great difiiculty in persuading some of our friends 
to lay aside books that had been written with the design of forcing 
5-0U into the arena : hence, I should have been glad that the 
Hutten's Expostulatio, and still more your Sponge for Hutten, 
had not been published. If you will reflect upon the production, 
you must feel how easy it is to write about moderation, and to 
accuse Luther of intemperance, but how difficult and impossible 
to practise these lessons except by a singular gift of grace." 



Hi MEMOIR. 

be done by civil and modest means tban by intemperate beat and 
passion ; that it would be better to inveigh against those who 
abuse the pope's authority, than against the popes themselves ; 
that new opinions should rather be promoted in the way of pro- 
posing doubts and difficulties, than by affirming and deciding 
peremptorily ; that nothing should be dehvered with faction and 
arrogance ; but that the mind, in these cases, should be kept 
entirely free from anger, hatred, and vain glory. I say not this," 
says Erasmus, "as if you wanted any admonitions of this kind, 
but only that you may not want them hereafter any more than 
you do at present." When this letter was written, Erasmus and 
Luther had never seen each other : it is dated from Louvain, 
May 30th, 1519 ; and it is hardly possible to read it without 
suspecting that Erasmus was entirely in Luther's sentiments, if 
he had possessed the courage to declare it. He concludes in 
these words, which seem to imply as much : — " I have dipped 
into your commentaries upon the Psahns ; they please me pro- 
digiously, and I hope will be read with great advantage. There 
is a prior of the monastery of Antwerp who says he was formerly 
your pupil, and loves you most affectionately. He is a truly 
Christian man, and almost the only one of his society who 
preaches Christ, the rest being attentive either to the fabulous 
traditions of men or to their own profit. I have written to 
Melancthon. The Lord Jesus pour upon you his spirit, that you 
may abound more and more every day to his glory ia the service 
of the church. Farewell." 

In 1519 Luther had a famous dispute at Leipsig with John 
Eckius. Eckius, as we have observed, wrote notes upon 
Luther's thesis, which Luther first, and afterwards Carlstadt, an- 
swered. While the dispute was pending, a conference was pro- 
posed at Leipsig, -wdth the consent of George, Duke of Saxony, 
who was cousin-german to Frederic the elector ; and accordingly 
Luther went thither at the end of June, accompanied by Carl- 



MEMOIE. liii 

stadt and Melanctlion * Melchior Adam relates tliat Lutlier 
could not obtain leave to dispute for some time, but was only a 
spectator of what passed between Carlstadt and Eckius, till 
Eckius got at last a protection for him from the duke. It is 
certain, however, that they disputed upon the most delicate 
points ; upon purgatory, upon indulgences ; and especially upon 
the authority of the pope. Luther objected to this last as being 
an invidious and unnecessary subject ; and that he would not 
have meddled with it if Eckius had not put it among the propo- 
sitions which they were to argue. Eckius answered, and it must 
be owned with some reason, that Luther had first given occasion 
to that question by touching upon it himself, and teaching several 
things contrary to the authority of the holy see. In this dispute, 
after many texts of Scripture and many passages from the 
fathers had been cited and canvassed by both sides, they 
came to settle the sense of the famous words, " Thou art Peter, 
and upon this rock will I build my church." Luther asserted, 
that by rocTc is to be understood either power or faith : if power, 
then our Saviour hath added to no purpose, " and I will give 
thee the keys, &c. ;" if faith, as it ought, then it is also common 
to all other churches, and not peculiar to that of Eome. Eckius 
replied, that these words settled a supremacy upon St. Peter ; 
that they ought to be understood of his person according to the 



* To enable him to make a decent appearance at Leipsig, 
Luther was obliged to ask the parsimonious elector, who for the 
last two or three years had omitted to supply him with clothes, 
for a gown ; his letter is a curiosity : "I beseech your electoral 
grace to have the kindness to buy me a white surplice and a black 
one. I humbly ask for the white one, but your highness owes 
me the black, having promised it to me two or three years ago. 
There is so much difficulty in inducing Pfeffinger to untie his 
purse-strings, that I have been forced to procure one myself. I 
humbly pray your highness, who considered that the Psalmster 
deserved a black surplice, not to deem St. Faul unworthy of a 
white one." 



liv MEMOIB. 

explication of tlie fathers ; that the contrary opinion was one of 
the errors of Wicliff and John Huss, which were condemned ; 
and that he followed the opinion of the Bohemians. Luther was 
not to be silenced with this, but said, that although all the 
fathers had understood that passage of St. Peter in the sense of 
Eckius, yet he would oppose them with the authority of St. Paul 
and St. Peter himself; who say that Jesus Christ is the only 
foundation and corner-stone of his church ; and as to his following 
the opinion of the Bohemians, in maintaining a proposition con- 
demned with John Huss, that "the dignity of the pope was 
established by the emperor," though he did not, he said, approve 
of the schism of the Bohemians, yet he should make no scruple 
to affirm that, among the articles condemned with John Huss, 
there were some very sound and orthodox. This dispute ended 
at length, like all others, the parties not the least nearer in 
opinions, but more at enmity with each other's persons. It 
seems, however, granted on all sides, that whde Eckius made the 
best possible defence for his party, Luther did not acquire in 
this dispute that success and applause which he expected ; and it 
is agreed also that he made a concession to Eckius, which he 
afterwards retracted, that the pope was head of the church by 
human though not by divine right, which made George Duke of 
Saxony say, after the dispute was over, *' Sive jure divino, sive 
humano sit papa, est tamen papa:" "Whether he be pope by 
divine right or human, he is nevertheless pope." 

This same year, 1519, Luther's books concerning indulgences 
were formally censured by the divines of Louvain and Cologne. 
The former having consulted with the cardinal of Tortosa, after- 
wards Adrian VL, passed their censure on the 7th of November ; 
and the censure of the latter, which was made at the request of 
the divines of Louvain, was dated on the 30th of August. Luther 
wrote immediately against these censures, and declared that he 
valued them not : that several great and good men, such as 



mem:oie. Iv 

Occam, Pious MIrandula, Laiirentius Valla, and otHers, had been 
condemned in the same unjust manner ; naj, he would venture 
to add to the list Jerome of Prague and John Huss. He charged 
those universities with rashness in being the first that declared 
against him, and accused them of want of proper respect and 
deference to the holy see, in condemning a book presented to the 
pope on which judgment had not yet been passed. About the 
end of this year Luther published a book, in which he contended 
for the communion being celebrated in both kinds. This was 
condemned by the Bishop of Misnia, Jan. 24th, 1520. Luther, 
seeing himself so beset with adversaries, wrote a letter to the 
new emperor, Charles Y. of Spain, who was not yet come into 
Germany, and another to the elector of Mentz ; in both which 
he humbly implores protection till he should be able to give an 
account of himself and his opinions ; adding, that he did not 
desire to be defended if he were convicted of impiety or heresy, 
but only that he might not be condemned without a hearing. 
The former of these letters is dated Jan. 15th, 1520 ; the latter, 
Feb. 4th. The elector Frederic fell about this time into a dan- 
gerous illness, which threw the whole party into great consterna- 
tion, and occasioned some apprehensions at Wittemberg : but of 
this he happily recovered. 

AYhile Luther was labouring to excuse himself to the emperor 
and the bishops of Germany, Eckius had gone to Rome to solicit 
his condemnation, which, it may easily be conceived, was not 
now very difficult to be obtained, as he and his whole party were 
had in abhorrence, and the elector Frederic was out of favour 
on account of the protection which he afforded Luther. The 
elector excused himself to the pope in a letter dated April 1st, 
which the pope answered, and sent him at the same time a copy 
of a bull, in which he was required " either to oblige Luther to 
retract his errors, or to imprison him for the disposal of the 
pope." This peremptory proceeding alarmed at first the court 



Ivi MEMOIE. 

of the elector, and many German nobles who were of Luther's 
party, but their final resolution was to protect and defend him. 
In the mean time, though Luther's condemnation was determined 
at Home, Miltitz did not cease to treat in Germany, and to pro- 
pose means of accommodation. To this end he applied to the 
chapter of the Augustine friars there, and prayed them to inter- 
pose their authority, and to beg of Luther that he would endea- 
vour to concihate the pope by a letter full of submission and 
respect. Luther consented to write, and his letter bears date 
April 6th ;* but matters had been carried too far on both sides 
ever to admit of a reconciliation. The mischief Luther had 
done, and continued to do, to the papal authority was irreparable, 
and the rough usage and persecutions he had received from the 
pope's party had now inflamed his active spirit to that degree 
that it was not possible to appease it but by measures which the 
pope and the court of Rome could never be expected to adopt. 
At all events, the letter he wrote at this juncture could not be 
attended with any healing consequences ; the style and senti- 
ments were too irritating for a less degree of pride than that 
which presided at Eome. In this epistle Luther says, " that 
among the monsters of the age with whom he had been engaged 
for three years past, he had often called to mind the blessed 
father Leo: that now he began to triumph over his enemies 
and to despise them ; that, though he had been obhged to appeal 
from his hohness to a general council, yet he had no aversion to 
him; that he had always wished and prayed for all sorts of 



* There has been much controversy respecting the date of this 
letter. In the edition of Jena, it bears the date 6th April, 1520, 
which, no doubt, is the correct one, although Seckendorf is 
inclined to place it in October of the same year ; that is to say, 
long after the publication of Leo's bull. Roscoe, in his Leo X.., 
vol. ii. chap, xix., and Appendix (Bohn's edit. p. 468), enters 
fully into the subject, and unravels it with great clearness. 



MEMOIE. Ivii 

blessings upon his person and see ; that his design was only to 
defend the truth ; that he had never spoken dishonourably of his 
holiness, but had called him a Daniel in the midst of Babylon, to 
denote the innocence and purity he had preserved among so many 
corrupt men ; that the court of Eome was visibly more corrupt 
than either Babylon or Sodom ; and that his holiness was as a 
lamb among wolves, a Daniel among lions, and anEzekiel among 
scorpions ; that there were not above three or four cardinals of 
any learning or piety ; that it was against these disorders of the 
court of E,ome he was obliged to appear ; that Cardinal Cajetan, 
who was ordered by his holiness to treat with him, had shown no 
inclinations to peace ; that his nuncio, Miltitz, had indeed f-ome to 
two conferences with him, and that he had promised Miltitz to 
be silent, and submit to the decision of the Archbishop of Triers; 
but that the dispute at Leipsig had hindered the execution of 
this project, and put things into greater confusion ; that Miltitz 
had applied a third time to the chapter of his order, at whose 
instigation he had written to his holiness ; and that he now 
threw himself at his feet, praying him to impose silence upon his 
enemies ; but that, as for a recantation on his part, he must not 
insist upon it unless he would increase the troubles ; nor prescribe 
him rules for the interpretation of the word of God, because it 
ought not to be limited. Then he admonishes the pope not to 
suffer himself to be seduced by his flatterers into a persuasion 
that he can command and require all things^ that he is above a 
council and the universal church, that he alone has a right to 
interpret Scripture ; but to believe those rather who debase than 
those who exalt him." 

The continual importunities of Luther's adversaries with Leo 
caused him at length to publish a formal condemnation of him 
in a bull dated June 15th, 1520. In the beginning of this bull 
the pope directs his speech to Jesus Christ, to St. Peter, St. Paul, 
and all the saints, invokiug their aid, in the most solemn expres- 



Ivili Ml^MO Ig. 

sions against tlie new errors and heresies, and for the preserra- 
tion of the faith, peace, and unity of the church. Then he ex- 
presses his great grief for the late propagation of these errors in 
Germany ; errors either already condemned by the councils and 
constitutions of the pope, or new propositions heretical, false, 
scandalous, apt to offend and seduce the faithful. Then, after 
enumerating forty-one propositions collected from Luther's 
writings, he does, by the advice of his cardinals, and after mature 
deliberation, condemn them as respectively heretical ; and forbids 
all Christians, under the pain of excommunication, and depriva- 
tion of all their dignities, which they should incur ipso facto, to 
hold, defend, or preach any of these propositions or to suffer 
others to preach them. As to Luther, after accusing him of dis- 
obedience and obstinacy, because he had appealed from his cita- 
tion to. a council, though he thought he might at that instant 
condemn him as a notorious heretic, yet he gave him sixty days 
to consider, assuring him that if in that time he would revoke 
his errors and return to his duty, and give him real proofs that 
he did so by loublic acts and by burning his books, he should find 
in him a true paternal affection : otherwise he declares, that he 
should incur the punishment due to heretics.* 

Luther, now perceiving that all hopes of an accommodation were 
at an end, no longer observed the least reserve or moderation. 
Hitherto he had treated his adversaries with some degree of 
ceremony, paid them some regard ; and, not being openly sepa- 
rated from the church, did not quite abandon the discipline of it 
But now he kept no measures with them, broke off all his 
engagements to the church, and publicly declared that he would 



* When the bull of condemnation reached Germany, the whole 
people were in commotion. M Erfurt the students took it out 
of the booksellers' shops, tore it in pieces, and threw it into the 
river with this pun, " A bubble [bulla) it is, and as a bubble let 
it swim." 

L 



MEMOIE. lix 

no longer communicate in it. The first step he took after the 
publication of the pope's bull "svas to write against it, which he 
did in very severe terms, calling it " the execrable bull of Anti- 
christ." He published likewise a book called The Cajptivity of 
Bahylon, in which he begins with a protestation, " That he 
became every day more knowing ; that he was ashamed and 
repented of what he had written about indulgences two years 
before, when he was a slave to the superstitions of Home ; that 
he did not indeed then reject indulgences, but had since dis- 
covered that they are nothing but impostures, fit to raise money, 
and to destroy the faith ; that he was then content with denying 
the papacy to he Jure divino, but had lately been convinced that 
it was the kingdom of Babylon ; that he then wished a general 
council would settle the communion in both kinds, but now 
plainly saw that it was commanded by Scripture ; that he did abso- 
lutely deny the seven sacraments, owning no more than three, 
baptism, penance, and the Lord's supper," &c. About the same 
time also he published another treatise in the German language, 
to make the court of Eome odious to the Germans, in which "he 
gives a history of the wars raised by the popes against the em- 
perors, and represents the miseries Germany had suffered by 
them. He strives to engage the emperor and princes of Germany 
to espouse his party against the pope by maintaining that they 
had the same power over the clergy as they had over the laity, 
and that there was no appeal from their jurisdiction. He advised 
the whole nation to shake off" the pope's power, and proposes a 
reformation, by which he subjects the pope and bishops to the 
power of the emperor, &c." Lastly, that he might not be 
wanting in anything which should testify his abhorrence of the 
proceedings in the court of Eome, Luther determined to treat 
the pope's bull and decretals in the same manner as they had 
ordered his writings to be treated ; and therefore, calling the 
students at Wittemberg together, he flung them into a fire pre- 



Ix MEMOIE. ■ 

pared for that purpose, saying, " Because thou liast troubled the 
holy one of God, let eternal fire trouble thee." This ceremony 
was performed Dec. 10th, 1520. 

The bull of Luther's condemnation was carried into Germany, 
and published there by Eckius, who had solicited it at Kome ; 
and who, together, with Jerome Aleander, a person eminent for 
his learning and eloquence, was entrusted by the pope with the 
execution of it. In the mean time, Charles V. of Spain, after 
lie had adjusted the affairs of the Low Countries, went into 
Germany, and was crowned emperor, October 21st, at Aix-la- 
ChapeUe. The plague preventing his remaining long in that 
city, he went to Cologne, and appointed a diet at Worms, to 
meet January 6th, 1521. Frederic, elector of Saxony, could 
not be present at the coronation, but was left sick at Cologne, 
where Aleander, who accompanied the emperor, presented him 
with a brief, which the pope had sent by him, and by which his 
lioliness gave him notice of the decree he had made against the 
errors of Luther. Aleander told the elector, that the pope had 
entrusted himself and Eckius with the affair of Luther, which 
was of the utmost consequence to the whole Christian world, and, 
if there were not a speedy stop put to it, would undo the empire ; 
that he did not doubt but that the elector would imitate the 
emperor and other princes of the empire, who had received the 
pope's judgment respectfully. He informed his highness also, 
that he had two things to request of him in the name of the 
pope : — " First, That he would cause all Luther's books to be 
burnt ; and, secondly, that he would either put Luther to death, 
or imprison him, or send him to the pope." The pope sent also 
a brief to the university of Wittemberg, to exhort them to put 
his bull in execution against Luther ; but neither the elector 
nor the imiversity paid any regard to his briefs. Luther, at the 
same time, renewed his appeal to a future council, in terms very 
severe upon the pope, calling him tyrant, heretic, apostate, anti- 



MEilOIR. Ixi 

cLrist, and blasphemer ; and in it prays the emperor, electors, 
princes, and lords ot the empire, to favour his appeal, nor sufier 
the execution of the bull, till he should be lawfully summoned, 
heard, and convicted, before impartial jndges. This appeal is 
dated November 17th. Erasmus, indeed, and other German 
divines, were of opinion that things ought not to be carried to 
this extremity, foreseeing, that the fire which consumed Luther's 
books would soon put all Germany into a flame. They proposed, 
therefore, to agree upon arbitrators, or to refer the whole cause 
to the first general council. But these pacific proposals came too 
late ; and Eckius and Aleander pressed the matter so vigorously 
both to the emperor and the other German princes, that Luther's 
books were burnt in several cities of Germany. Aleander also 
earnestly importuned the emperor for an edict against Luther ; 
but he found many and great obstacles. Luther's party was 
very powerful ; and Charles V. was not willing to give so public 
an offence to the elector of Saxony, who had lately refused the 
empire that he might have it. 

To overcome these difficulties Aleander gained a new bull from 
Eome, which declared, that Luther had incurred by obstinacy 
the penalty denounced in the first. He also wrote to the court 
of Eome for the assistance of money and friends, to be used at 
the diet of Worms ; and, because the Lutherans insisted that the 
contest was chiefly about the jurisdiction of the pope and the 
abuses of the court of Eome, and that they were only persecuted 
for the sake of delivering up Germany to the tyranny of that 
court, he undertook to show that Luther had broached many 
errors relating to the mysteries of religion, and revived the 
heresies of Wicliff and John Huss. The diet of Worms was held 
in the beginning of 1521, where Aleander, in the absen5S~of 
Luther, employed his eloquence and~lntBrest so successfully that 
the emperor and xDrinces of the empire were about to execute the 
pope's bull against Luther with severity, and without delay. 



Ixii MEMOIJi. 

The only way wliicli the elector of Saxony and Luther's friends 
could invent to ward off the blow was to say, " That it was not 
evident that the propositions objected to were his ; that his^ 
adversaries might attribute them to him falsely ; that the books 
from which they were taken might be forged ; and, above all, 
that it was not just to condemn him without summoning " aind 
hearing him." The emperor, therefore, with the consent of the 
princes of the diet, sent Sturmius, an officer, from Worms to 
Wittemberg, to conduct Luther safely to the diet. Sturmius 
carried with him a "safe-conduct" to Luther, signed by the em- 
peror and princes of the diet, and also a letter from the emperor, 
dated March 21st, 1521, and directed "To the honourable, 
beloved, devout doctor, Martin Luther, of the order of St. 
Augustine ;" in which he summoned him to appear at the diet, 
and assured him that he need not fear any violence or ill-treat- 
ment.* Nevertheless, Luther's friends were much against his 
going, some telling him that by burning his books he might 
easily know what censure would be passed on himself; others 
reminding him of the treatment they had, upon a like occasion, 
shown to John Huss, But Luther despised all dangers ; and, in 
a strain which is extremely characteristic of him, declared, that 
" If he knew there were as many devils at Worms as tiles upon 
the houses, he would go." 



* The Emperor's mandate was in the following terms : — 
"Honourable, dear, and devoted Luther, — Ourself and the 
states of the holy Eoman empire, assembled at Worms, having 
resolved to demand an explanation from you on the subject of 
your doctrines and your writings, we send you herewith a safe 
conduct, to ensure your personal security. Wherefore, imme- 
diately set out, for such is our will, so that within twenty days 
of the receipt of our mandate, you may appear before us and the 
States. You have neither violence nor snares to fear. We wish 
you to confide in our imperial word, and rely on your obedience 
to our earnest wishes." 



MEMOIE. Ixiii 

He arrived accordingly at "Worms, April 16th, where a prodi- 
gious multitude of people were assembled, for the sake of seeing 
a man of whom so much had now been heard. When he appeared 
before the diet, he had two questions put to him by John 
Eckius: — " First, whether he owned those books that went under 
his name ; and, secondly, whether he intended to retract or 
defend what was contained in them." These queries produced 
an altercation which lasted some days, but which ended at length 
in this single and peremptory declaration of Luther, that " unless 
he was convinced by texts of Scripture or evident reason (for he 
did not think himself obliged to submit to the pope or his coun- 
cils), he neither could nor would retract anything, because it was 
not lawful for him to act against his conscience." This being 
Luther's final resolution, the emperor declared to the diet that 
he was determined to proceed against him as a notorious 
heretic, but that he intended, nevertheless, he should return 
to Wittemberg, according to the conditions laid down in his 
" safe-conduct." Luther left Worms, April 26th, conducted by 
Sturmius, who had brought him ; and being arrived at Friburg, 
he wrote letters to the emperor and princes of the diet to com- 
mend his cause to them, and to excuse himself for not submitting 
to a recantation. These letters were conveyed by Sturmius, 
whom he sent back, on pretence that he was then out of danger ; 
but in reality, as it is supposed, that Sturmius might not be 
present at the execution of a scheme which had been concerted 
before Luther set out from Worms ; for the elector of Saxony, 
foreseeing that the emperor was going to make a bloody edict 
against Luther, and finding it impossible to support and protect 
him any longer without involving himself in difiiculties, resolved 
to have him taken away and concealed. This was proposed to 
Luther, and accordingly when he went from Eisenach, May 3rd, 
through a wood, in his way to Wittemberg, he was suddenly 
set upon by some horsemen in disguise, deputed for that purpose. 



Ixiv MEMOIE. 

who pretended to take Hm by force, and carried lilm secretly 
into tLe castle of Wittemberg * Melcbior Adam relates tbat 
there were only eight nobles privy to this expedition, which was 
executed with so much address and fidelity that no man knew 
what was become of him or where he was. This contrivance 
produced two advantages to Luther : as first, it caused people to 
believe that he was taken away by the intrigues of his enemies, 
which made them odious and exasperated men's minds against 
them ; and secondly, it secured him against the prosecution 
^\hich the pope and the emperor were making against him. 

Before the diet of Worms was dissolved, Charles Y. caused an 
edict to be drawn up, which was dated the 8th of May, and 
solemnly published on the 26th in the assembly of the electors 
and princes held in his palace. In this edict, after declaring it 
to be the duty of an emperor, not only to defend the limits of 
the empire, but to maintain religion and the true faith, and to 
extinguish heresies in their origin, he commands. That Martin 
Luther be, agreeably to the sentence of the pope, henceforward 
looked upon as a member separated from the church, a schis- 
matic, and an obstinate and notorious heretic. He forbids all 
persons, under the penalty of high treason, loss of goods, and 
being put under the ban of the empire, to receive or defend. 



* The following is his own account : — " I crossed the forest 
to rejoin my parents, and bad just quitted them, intending 
to go to Walterhausen, when I was made prisoner near the 
fortress of Altenstein. Amsdorf, no doubt, was aware that 
it was arranged to seize me, but he does not know where I 
am kept. My brother, having seen the horsemen coming 
up, leapt from the carriage without leave-taking, and I have 
been told that he reached AYalterhausen on foot that even- 
ing. As for me, they took off my robe, and made me dress 
myself as a cavalier, with a false beard, and I have since allowed 
my hair and beard to grow. You would scarcely recognise me — 
inSeed, I hardly know myself However, here I am, living ia 
Christian liberty, freed from all the tyrant's laws." 



MEilOIK. IxV 

maintain or protect him, either in conversation or in writing ; 
and be orders, that, after the twenty-one days allowed in his 
safe-conduct, he should be proceeded against according to the 
form of the ban of the empire, in what place soever he should 
be : or, at least, that he should be seized and imprisoned, till 
his imperial majesty's pleasure should be further known. The 
same punishments are denounced against all the accomplices, 
adherents, followers, or favourers of Luther ; and also all per- 
sons are forbidden to print, sell, buy, or read any of his books : 
and, because there had been published several books concerning 
the same doctrines, without his name, and several pictures dis- 
persed that were injurious to the pope, cardinal, and bishops, he 
commands the magistrates to seize and burn them, and to punish 
the authors and printers of those pictures and libels. Lastly, it 
forbids in general the printing of any book concerning matters of 
faith, which hath not the approbation of the ordinary, and some 
neighbouring university. 

While the bull of Leo X., executed by Charles Y., was thun- 
dering throughout the empire, Luther was safely shut up in his 
castle, which he afterwards called his Hermitage and his Patmos. 
Here he held a constant correspondence with his friends at 
Wittemberg, and was employed in composing books in favour of 
his own cause, and against his adversaries. He did not how- 
ever so closely confine himself, but that he frequently made 
excursions into the neighbourhood, though always under some 
disguise or other. One day he assumed the title and appearance 
of a nobleman : but it may be supposed that he did not act his 
part very gracefully ; for a gentleman who attended him under 
that character, to an inn upon the road, was, it seems, so fearful 
of a discovery, that he thought it necessary to caution him 
against that absence of mind peculiar to literary men ; bidding 
him " keep close to his sword, without taking the least notice of 
books, if by chance any should fall in his way." He used some- 



Ixvi MEMOIE. 

times even to go out a hunting with those few who were in his 
secret ; which, however, we may imagine, he did more for 
health than for pleasure, as indeed may be collected from his 
own curious account of it. " I was," says he, " lately two days 
a hunting, in which amusement I found both pleasure and pain. 
We killed a brace of hares, and took some unhappy partridges ; 
a very pretty employment truly for an idle man ! However, I 
could not forbear theologizing amidst dogs and nets ; for, thought 
I to myself, do not we, in hunting innocent animals to death 
with dogs, very much resemble the devil, who, by crafty wiles 
and the instruments of wicked priests, is perpetually seeking 
whom he may devour ? Again : We happened to take a leveret 
alive, which I put into my pocket, with an intent to preserve it ; 
yet we were not gone far before the dogs seized upon it, as it 
was in my pocket, and worried it. Just so the pope and the 
devD. rage furiously to destroy the souls that I have saved, in 
spite of all my endeavours to prevent them. In short, I am 
tired of hunting these little innocent beasts ; and had rather be 
employed, as I have been for some time, in spearing bears, 
wolves, tigers, and foxes ; that is, in opposing and confounding 
wicked and impious divines, who resemble those savage animals 
in their qualities." 

Weary at length of his retirement, he appeared publicly 
again at Wittemberg, March 6th, 1522, after he had been absent 
about ten months.* He appeared indeed without the elector's 



* A curious account of his journey to Wittemberg is given by 
one of the historians of the Reformation : — 

" John Kessler, a young theologian of Saint-Gall, on his way 
with a friend to Wittemberg to finish his studies there, fell in 
one evening in an inn near the gates of Jena with Luther, 
dressed as a cavalier. They did not know him. The cavalier 
was seated at a table reading a little book, which, as they saw 
afterwards, was the Psalter in Hebrew. He politely saluted 
them, and invited them to seat themselves at his table. In the 



MEMOTB. Ixvii 

leave, but immediately wrote liim a letter, to prevent his being 
offended. The diet of Charles V., severe as it was, had given 
little or no check to Luther's doctrine ; for the emperor was 
no sooner gone into Flanders, than his edict was neglected and 
despised, and the doctrine seemed to spread even faster than 
before. Carlstadt, in Luther's absence, had acted with even 



course of conversation, he inquired what was thought of Luther 
in Switzerland ? Kessler replied, that some did not know how 
to praise him enough, and daily thanked God for having sent 
him on earth to exalt the truth ; whilst others, and especially the 
priests, denounced him as a heretic who ought to be condignly 
punished. From something which the innkeeper let drop to the 
young travellers, they suspected him to be Ulrich von Hutten. 
Presently after two traders came in. One of them drew 
from his pocket, and placed on the table, a newly printed pam- 
phlet of Luther's, in sheets, and asked if they had seen it. 
Luther said a few words about the indifference towards serious 
matters manifested by the princes at that time assembled at the 
diet of Nuremberof. He also expressed a fervent hope 'that the 
Gospel truth would bear fuller fruit in succeeding generations, 
not poisoned as heretofore with papal error.' One of the traders 
replied, ' I am unskilled in these questions ; but, to my mind, 
Luther must either be an angel from heaven or a devil from hell; 
at all events, he is so remarkable a person, that I will spend the 
last ten florins I have saved in going to confess to him.' This 
conversation took place during supper. Luther had previously 
arranged with the host to pay the reckoning of the whole party. 
When they separated, Luther shook hands with the two Swiss 
(the traders had been called away by their business), and begged 
them to bear his remembrances to Doctor Jerome Schurff", their 
countryman, as soon as they reached Wittemberg. On their 
asking him whose remembrances they were to bear, he replied, 
' Simply tell him that he who is to come salutes him ; he will 
not fail to comprehend these words.' When the traders returned, 
and learnt that it was Luther with whom they had been talking, 
they were inconsolable at not having known it sooner, that 
they might have paid more respect, and spared themselves the 
mortification ol having spoken so foolishly in his presence. The 
following morning they were up betimes on purpose to see him 
before he left, and to tender him their most humble excuses. 
Luther only owned to its being hunself by implication." 



Ixviii MEMOIE. 

more vigour tlian his leader, and liad attempted to abolisli the 
use of the mass, to remove images out of the churches, to set 
aside auricular confession, invocation of saints, the abstaining 
from meats ; had allowed the monks to leave their monasteries, 
to neglect their vows and to marry, and thus had quite changed 
the doctrine and discipline of the church at "Wittemberg : all 
which, though not against Luther's sentiments, was yet blamed 
by him, as being rashly and unseasonably done.* The refor pia- 
tion was still confined to Germany ; it had not extended to 
France ; and Henry YIII. of England made the most vigorous 
acts to prevent its entering his realm ; and to shew his zeal for 
the Holy See, wrote a treatise " Of the Seven Sacraments," against 
Luther's book "Of the Captivity of Babylon;" which he pre- 
sented to Leo X. in Oct. 1521. The pope received it favourably, 



* Carlstadt, having thrown down the images, proceeded to 
preach against image-worship ; Staupitz showed him the re- 
former's letter, but Carlstadt only smiled, replying, "It is 
written, It is better to ohey God than man." Staupitz urged 
the pain which these profanations of the sanctuary had caused to 
their common leader. The archdeacon replied, " It is no new 
thing that the world should be troubled for God's word. 
Herod, with all his court, was alarmed on hearing of the birth 
of Jesus ; the earth shook and the sun was darkened at the death 
of Christ. Tliat the multitude and the sages are ofi'ended with 
it is an evidence that my teaching is true." " But," rejoined 
Staupitz, "our father condemns, like you, the worship of 
images, but he does not wish violence to be used." " Hold your 
peace," replied Carlstadt ; "you forget what Luther has said: 
The tvord of the Lord is not a word of peace, but a szvord." 
Staupitz then menaced him with the rigour of the secular power. 
Carlstadt smiled: "My father," said he, " the same menace was 
addressed to brother Martin by the messenger of Cardinal 
Cajetan, and do you not recollect his reply : / tvill go whither 
God pleases, beneath his heaven. I make the same answer to 
you." With these words the interview terminated ; Staupitz 
immediately communicated the particulars to Luther, who from 
that day forth vowed against his old master in theology a hatred 
which time neither extinguished nor weakened. 



MEMOIR. Ixix 

and complimented Henry with tlie title of " Defender of the 
Faith." Luther, however, paid no regard to his dignity, but 
treated .both his person and performance in the most contemp- 
tuous manner. Henry complained of this rude usage to the 
princes of Saxony ; and Fisher, bishop of Eochester, replied, in 
behalf of Henry's treatise : but neither the king's complaint, nor 
the bishop's reply, were attended with any visible effects. 

Luther now made open war with the pope and bishops ; and, 
that he might make the people despise their authority as much 
as possible, he wrote one book against the pope's bull, and another 
against the order falsely called "the order of bishops." The 
same year, 1522, he wrote a letter, July 29th, to the assem- 
bly of the States of Bohemia, in which he assured them that 
he was labouring to establish their doctrine in Germany, and 
exhorted them not to return to the communion of the church of 
Eome; and he published also this year a translation of the 
" New Testament" in the German tongue, which was afterwards 
corrected by himself and Melancthon. This translation having 
been printed several times, and in general circulation, Ferdi- 
nand, archduke of Austria, the emperor's brother, made a very 
severe edict, to suppress its publication, and forbade all the 
subjects of his imperial majesty to have any copies of it, or of 
Luther's other books. Some other princes followed his example, 
which provoked Luther to write a treatise " Of the Secular 
Power," in which he accuses them of tyranny and impiety.* The 



* In this violent invective Luther says : — " Princes are of 
the world, and the world is alien from God ; so that they live 
according to the world, and against God's law. Be not asto- 
nished, therefore, by their furious warring against the Gospel, 
for they cannot act contrary to their own nature. From the 
beginning of the world a wise and prudent prince has been a 
vara avis, and an honest and upright prince stiU more rare. 
They are generally great fools, good-for-nothing fellows, and 
the greatest rascals on earth {maxime fatui, pessimi nebulones 



IxX MEMOIE. 

diet of tlie empire was held at IN'uremberg, at the end of the year*^ 
to which Adrian VI. sent his brief, dated IS'ov. 25th ; for Leo X. 
died Dec. 2nd, 1521, and Adrian had been elected pope the 
9th of January following. In this brief, among other things, he 
informs the diet, that he had heard, with grief, that Martin 
Luther, after the sentence of Leo X., which was ordered to be 
executed by the edict of Worms, continued to teach the same 
errors, and daily to publish books full of heresies : that it 
appeared strange to him, that so large and so rehgious a nation 
could be seduced by a wretched apostate friar : that nothing, 
however, could be more pernicious to Christendom : and that, 
therefore, he exhorts them to use their utmost endeavours to 
make Luther, and the authors of these tumults, return to their 
duty ; or, if they refuse and continue obstinate, to proceed 
against them according to the laws of the empire, and the 
severity of the last edict. 

The resolution of this diet was published in the form of an 



super terram). And so the worst is always to be expected from 
them, and scarcely ever any good ; especially when the salvation' 
of souls is concerned. They serve God as lictors and executioners 
when he wishes to punish the wicked. Our God is a great and 
mighty King, and it is necessary that he have noble, illustrious, 
rich executioners and lictors, such as they, and it pleases Him 
that they should have riches and honour in abundance, and 
be feared of all. It is His divine pleasure that we style his 
executioners very merciful lords, that we prostrate ourselves 
at their feet, that we be their most obedient and humble 
subjects. But these very executioners do not push their arti- 
fices so far as to pretend to be good shepherds of their flock. 
If a prince be wise, upright, a Christian, we regard it as a great 
miracle, a precious sign of divine favour ; for, commonly, it 
happens as with the Jews, to whom God said, ' I will give thee 
a king in my anger, and take him away in my wrath.' {Dabo 
tihi regem in furore meo, et aiiferam in indignatione med.) And 
look at our Christian princes who protect the faith, forsooth^ 
while they devour the faith. Good people, trust not to them/'' 



MEMOIE. Ixxi 

edict, March 6tli, 1523 ; but it had no effect in checking the Lu- 
therans, who still went on in the same triumphant manner. 
This year Luther wrote a great many tracts : among the rest, 
one upon the dignity and office of the supreme magistrate ; with 
which Frederic, elector of Saxony, is said to have been highly 
pleased. He sent, about the same tmie, a writing in the Ger- 
man language to the Waldenses, or Picards, in Bohemia and 
^Moravia, who had applied to him " about worshipping the body 
of Christ in the eucharist." He wi'ote also another book, which 
he dedicated to the senate and people of Prague, " concerning 
the institution of ministers of the church." He drew up a form 
of saying mass. He wrote a piece entitled " An Example of 
Popish Doctrine and Divinity;" which Dupin calls a satire 
against nuns, and those who profess a monastic life. He wrote 
also against the vows of virginity, in his preface to his commen- 
tary on 1 Cor. vii. : and his exhortations here were, it seems, 
foUowed with effects ; for, soon after, nine nuns eloped from a 
nunnery, and were brought to AVittemberg. Whatever offence 
this procee ding m ight give to the papists, it was highly extolled 
by Luther ; who, in a book written in the German language, 
compares the deliverance of these nuns from the slavery of a 
.monastic life, to that of the souls which Jesus Christ has deTiT 
vered bj^ his death.* This year he had occasion to lament the 



* We give his own words : — " isine nuns came to me yesterday, 
who had escaped from their imprisonment in the convent of 
Kimptschen ; among them were Staupitza, and two other mem- 
bers of Zeschau's family." (April 6th, 1523.) " I greatly com- 
miserate these poor girls, and still more those others who are 
dying in crowds of this accursed and incestuous chastity. This 
most feeble sex is united to the male by nature, by God himself ; 
if they are separated, it perishes. O cruel, tyrannical parents ! . . . 
You ask my intentions with respect to them. In the first place, 
I shall communicate to their parents my desire that they may be 
permitted to return home ; if they refuse, I shall provide an asylum 

/ 



Ixxii MEMOIE. 

death of two of his followers, who were burnt at Brussels, and 
were the first who suffered martyrdom for his doctrine. He 
wrote also a consolatory epistle to three noble ladies at Misnia, 
who were banished from the duke of Saxony's court at Friburg, 
for reading his books. 

In the beginning of 1524, Clement VII. sent a legate into 
Germany to the diet which was to be held at j^uremberg. This 
pope had succeeded Adrian, who died in October, 1523, and had, 
a little before his death, canonized Benno, who was bishop of 
Meissen in the time of Gregory VII., and one of the most zealous 
defenders of the holy see. Luther, imagining that this was 
done directly to oppose him, drew up a piece with this title, 
" Against the New Idol and Devil set up at Meissen ;" in which 
he treats the memory of Gregory with great freedom, and does 
not spare even Adrian. Clement VII. 's legate, therefore, i*e- 
presented to the diet at Nuremberg the necessity of enforcing 
the execution of the edict of Worms, which had been strangely 
neglected by the princes of the empire ; but, notwithstanding 
the legate's solicitations, which were very pressing, the decrees 
of that diet were thought so ineffectual, that they were con- 
demned at Eome, and rejected by the emperor. It was in this 
year that the dispute between Luther and Erasmus began about 
free-will. Erasmus had been much courted by the papists to^ 
write against Luther, but had hitherto avoided the task, by say- 



for them elsewhere. Their names are — Magdalen Staupitza, Elsa 
von Canitz, Ave Grossin, Ave Schonfeld, and her sister Margaret 
Schonfeld, Laneta von Golis, Margaret Zeschau, and Catherine 
von Bora (afterwards his wife). They made their escape in the 
most surprising manner. Pray beg some money for me of your 
rich courtiers, to enable me to support these poor girls for a 
week or a fortnight, until I restore them to their parents, or to 
those friends who have promised me to take care of them in the 
event cf their being rejected by their parents." (April 10th, 
1523.) 



MEMOIE. Ixxiii 

ing, "tliat Lutlier was too great a man for him to write against," 
and that he had learned more from one short page of Luther, than 
from all the large books of Thomas Aquinas. Besides, Erasmus 
was all along of opinion, that writing would not be found an 
effectual way to end the differences, and establish the peace of 
the church. Tired out, however, at length, with the importuni- 
ties of the pope and the catholic princes, and desirous at the 
same time to clear himself from the suspicion of favouring a 
cause which he would not seem to favour, he resolved to wnfel 
against Luther, though, as he tells Melancthon, it was with 
some reluctance ; and he chose free-will for the subject. His 
book was entitled " A Diatriba, or Conference about Free-will," 
and was written with much moderation, and without personal 
reflections. He tells Luther in the preface, " that he ought not 
to take his differing from him in opinion ill, because he had 
allowed himself the liberty of differing from the judgment of 
popes, councils, universities, and doctors of the church." Luther 
was some time before he answered Erasmus's book, but at last 
published a treatise, " De servo arbitrio, or. Of the Servitude of 
Man's Will;" and though Melancthon had promised Erasmus, 
that Luther should answer him with civility and moderation, yet 
Luther had so little regard to Melancthon's promise, that he 
never wrote anything more severe. He accused Erasmus of 
being careless about religion, and little solicitous what became 
of it, provided the world continued in peace, and that his notions 
were rather philosophical than Christian. Erasmus immediately 
replied to Luther, in a piece called " Hyp^eras pistes ;" in the first 
part of whicli he answers his arguments, and in the second his 
personal reflections. , 

In October, 1524, Luther threw off' the monastic habit, which, 
though not premeditated and designed, was yet a very proper 
preparative to a step he took the year after ; we mean, his mar- 
riage with Catherine von Bora. Catherine von Bora was a gentle- 
/2 



Ixxiv MEMOIR. 

man's daugliter, wlio liad been a nun, and was one of those whom 
we mentioned as escaping from the nunnery in 1523. Luther 
married her June 13th, 1525 ; and for this was blamed, not only by 
the catholics, but, as Melancthon says, by those of his own party.* 
He was even for some time ashamed of it himself; and owns, 
" that his marriage had made him so despicable, that he hoped his 
humiliation would rejoice the angels, and vex the devils." Me- 
lancthon found him so afflicted with what he had done, that he 
wrote some letters of consolation to him : he adds, however, 
that " this accident may possibly not be without its use, as it 
tends to humble him a little : for it is dangerous," says he, " not 
only for a priest, but for any man, to be too much elated and 
puffed up ; great success giving occasion to the sin of a high 
mind, not only, as the orator says, in fools, but sometimes even 
in wise men." It was not so much the marriage, as the circum- 
stances of the time, and the precipitation with which it was done, 
that occasioned the censures passed upon Luther. He married 
very suddenly, and at a time when Germany was groaning under 
the miseries of war, which was said at least to be owing to Lu- 
theranism. It was thought also an indecent thing in a man of 
forty-two years of age, who was then, as he declared, restoring 
the gospel and reforming mankind, to involve himself in mar- 
riage with a woman of six and twenty, upon any pretext. But 
Luther, as soon as he had recovered himself a little from this 
abashment, assumed his former air of intrepidity, and boldly 
supported what he had done with reasons. " I took a wife," 



* It seems that she had been previously attached to a young 
student at Nuremberg, Jerome Baumgartner; and we find Luther 
writing to him, Oct. 12th, 1524: — "If you are anxious to have 
your Catherine, come here at once, or she will become the pro- 
perty of another, who has already got her with him in his house. 
Still, she has not yet overcome her love for you. And, after all, 
I should perhaps be better pleased that you, having a prior title, 
should be united to her- ' 



MEilOIR. IXXV 

says he, " in obedience to my father's commands, and hastened 
the consummation, in order to prevent impediments, and stop 
the tongues of slanderers." It appears from his own confessions, 
that this reformer was very fond of Catherine von Bora, and used 
to call her his Kate, which occasioned some slanderous reflec- 
tions : and therefore, says he, " I married of a sudden, not 
only that I might not be obliged to hear the clamours which 
I knew would be raised against me, but to stop the mouths 
of those who already reproached me." Luther also gives us 
to understand that he did it partly as concurring with his grand 
scheme of opposing the catholics. " See," says he, " because 
they are thus mad, I have so prepared myself, that, before I die, 
I may be found by God in the state in which I was created, and, 
if possible, retain nothing of my former popish life. Therefore 
let them rave yet more, and this will be their last farewell ; for 
my mind presages that I shall soon be called by God unto his 
grace : therefore, at my father's commands, I have taken a 
wife." In another letter he speaks thus : " I hope I shall live a 
little longer, and I would not deny this last obedience to my 
father, who required it in hopes of issue, and also to confirm the 
doctrines I have taught." 

Luther, notwithstanding, was not himself altogetKer satisfied 
with these reasons. He did not think the step he had taken 
could be sufficiently justified upon the principles of human pru- 
dence ; and therefore we fijid him, in other places, endeavour- 
ing to account for it from a supernatural impulse. " The wise 
men amongst tSls are greatly provoked," says he ; " they are 
forced to own the thing to be of God ; but the disguise of the 
persons under which it is transacted, namely, of the young woman 
and myself, makes them think and say everything that is wicked." 
And elsewhere : " The Lord brought me suddenly, when I was 
thinking of other matters, to a marriage with Catherine von Bora, 
the nun." His party seem also to have favoured this supposition. 



Ixxvi MEMOIE. 

Thus says Melancthon : " As for the unreasonableness and want 
of consideration in this marriage, on which account our adversa- 
ries will chiefly slander us, we must take heed lest that disturb 
us : for perhaps there is some secret, or something divine couched 
under it, concerning which it does not become us to inquire too 
curiously ; nor ought we to regard the scoffs of those who exer- 
cise neither piety towards God, nor virtue towards men." But 
whether there was anything divine in it or not, Luther found 
himself extremely happy in his new state, and especially after 
his wife had brought him a son. " My rib Kate," says he, in the 
joy of his heart, " desires her compliments to you, and thanks 
you for the favour of your kind letter. She is very well, through 
God's mercy. She is obedient and complying with me in all 
things, and more agreeable, I thank God, than I could have ex- 
pected ; so that I would not change my poverty for the wealth 
of Croesus." He was heard to say, Seckendorf tells us, " that he 
would not exchange his wife for the kingdom of France, nor for 
the riches of the Venetians, and that for three reasons : first, 
because she had been given him by God, at the time when he 
implored the assistance of the Holy Ghost in finding a good 
wife : secondly, because, though she was not without faults, 
yet she had* fewer than other women : and, thirdly, because she 
religiously observed the conjugal fidelity she owed him." There 
was at first a report that Catherine von Bora was brought to bed 
soon after her marriage with Luther ; but Erasmus, who wrote 
that news to one of his friends, acknowledged the falsehood of it 
a little after, in one of his letters, dated the 13th of March, 1526 : 
" Luther''s marriage is certain ; the report of his wife's being so 
speedily brought to bed is false ; but I hear she is now with 
child. If the common story be true, that antichrist shall be 
be born of a monk and a nun, as some pretended, how many 
thousands of antichrists are there in the world already ? I was 
in hopes that a wife would have made Luther a little tamer : 



MEMOIE. Ixxvii 

but he, contrary to all expectation, lias published, indeed, a most 
elaborate, but as virulent a book against me, as ever be wrote. 
What will become of the pacific Erasmus, to be obliged to de- 
scend upon the stage at a time ot life when gladiators are usually- 
dismissed from the service, and not only to fight, but to fight 
with beasts !" 

In the mean time the disturbances in Germany increased 
every day ; and the war with the Turks, which brought the em- 
pire into danger, forced Charles V. at length to call a diet at 
Spires by his letters. May 24th, 1525. After he had given the 
reasons why the diet was not held the year before, as it was 
appointed, he said, " That it was not because he thought that 
the imperial diets ought not to meddle with matters of religion ; 
for he acknowledged, that, on the contrary, it was his duty to 
protect the Christian religion, to maintain the rights settled by 
their ancestors, and to prevent novelties and pernicious doctrines 
from arising and spreading ; but that, being certified that the 
edict of Worms was not executed in some parts of Germany, 
that there had been commotions and rebellions in some places, 
that the princes and members of the empire had many quarrels 
among themselves, that the Turk was ready to break in upon 
the territories of the empire, and that there were many disorders 
which needed a reformation, he had therefore appointed an im- 
perial diet to meet at Augsburg upon the 1st of October." Few 
of the princes, however, being able to meet at Augsburg, on 
account of the popular tumults which prevailed, the diet was 
prorogued, and fixed again at Spires, where it was held in June, 
1526. The emperor was not present in person : but Ferdiaand, 
his brother, and six other deputies, acted in his name. The 
elector of Saxony, and the landgrave of Hesse, who were of 
Luther's party, came to it. At the opening of it, upon the 25th, 
the emperor's deputies proposed such things as were to be the 
subject of consultation, and said, " That it was the emperor's 



Ixxviii MEMOIR. 

design that tlie members of this diet should prescribe the means 
of securing the Christian religion, and the ancient discipline of 
the church derived to us by tradition ; the ]3nnishments they 
should suffer who did anything contrary ; and how the popish 
princes might assist each other best in executing the edict of 
Worms." The deputies nominated to debate this matter were, 
among others, the landgrave of Hesse ; Sturmius, deputy ol 
Strasburg ; and Cressy, deputy of Nuremberg, who embraced 
.Luther's doctrine ; so that they could form no resolution con- 
lormable to the edict of Worms, but disputes ensued, and things 
were likely to end in a rupture. The elector of Saxony, land- 
grave of Hesse, and their party, were ready to withdraw ; but 
Ferdinand, and the emperor's deputies, foreseeing that if the diet 
broke up with these animosities, and came to no conclusion, all 
Germany would be in danger of falling into quarrels, took pains 
to pacify them, and brought them at last to make the following re- 
solution, viz. : " That it being necessary for the welfare of religion 
and the public peace, to call a national council in Germany, or a 
general one in Christendom, which should be opened within a 
year, deputies should be sent to the emperor, to desire him to 
return to Germany as soon as he could, and to hold a council ; 
and that, in the mean time, the princes and states should so 
demean themselves concerning the edict of Worms, as to be 
able to give an account of their carriage to God and the 
emperor." 

Before this resolution of the diet appeared, the elector of) 
Saxony and landgrave of Hesse proposed to the deputies ofj 
Strasburg and Nuremberg to make a league in the defence ofl 
those who should follow the new doctrine, and to bring the citiesi 
of Frankfurt and Ulm into it ; but the deputies could then give] 
no other answer than that they would consult their cities aboutj 
it. Affairs were now in great confusion in Germany, and theyj 
were not less so in Italy ; for a quarrel arose between the popej 



MEMOIE. Ixxix 

and the emperor, during wliicli Eome was twice taken and the 
pope imprisoned. While the princes were thus employed in 
quarrelling with each other, Luther persisted in carrying on the 
work of the Eeformation as well as by opposing the papists, as 
by combating the anabaptists and other fanatical sects ; which, 
having taken the advantage of his contest with the church of 
Home, had sprung up and established themselves in several 
places. la. 1527, Luther was suddenly seized with a coagulation 
of the blood about the heart, which had like to have put an end 
to his life ; but, recovering from this, he was attacked a second 
time with a spiritual temptation which he calls " Colaphus 
Satanse — a blow of Satan." He seemed, as he tells us, to per- 
ceive at his left ear a prodigious beating, as it were of the waves 
of the sea, and this not only within, but also without his head ; 
and so violent withal, that he thought every moment he was 
going to expire. Afterwards, when he felt it only in the inner 
part of his head, he grew almost senseless, was all over chilly, 
and not able to speak ; but, recovering himself a little, he applied 
himself to prayer, made a confession of his faith, and lamented 
grievously his unworthiness of martyrdom which he had so often 
and so ardently desired. In this situation he made a will, for he 
had a son, and his wife was again with child, in which he recom- 
mended his family to the care of heaven : " Lord God," says he, 
" I thank thee that thou wouldst have me poor upon earth, and 
a beggar. I have neither house, nor land, nor possessions, nor 
money to leave. Thou hast given me a wife and children ; take, 
them, I beseech thee, under thy care, and preserve them as thou 
hast preserved me." He was, however, permitted to recover 
from this terrible condition ; bur he often spoke of it afterwards 
to his friends as one of the severest buffetings he had ever 
received from Satan. Perhaps our medical readers will be dis- 
posed to consider it in a very different light. 

The troubles of G-ermany still continuing, the emperor was 



IxXX MEMOIE. 

forced to call a diet at Spires in 1529, to require tlie assistance of 
tlie princes of tlie empire against the Turks, who had taken Buda, 
and to find out some means of allaying the contests about religion, 
which increased daily. In this diet were long and violent debates, 
after which the decree of the former diet of Spires was again 
agreed to, in which it was ordered, that concerning the execution 
of the edict of Worms, the princes of the empire should act in 
such a manner, as that they might give a good account of their 
management to God and the emperor. But, because some had 
taken occasion from these general terms, to maintain all sorts of 
new doctrines, they made a new decree in this diet, to explain 
that of the former ; by which it was appointed, " That in those 
places where the edict of Worms had hitherto been observed, 
they should still keep to the execution of it, till a council should 
be called by the emperor ; that those who had taken up new 
opinions, and could not be brought to quit them without the 
hazard of some sedition, should be quiet for the future, and not 
admit of any alterations till the meeting of the council ; that the 
new doctrine about the eucharist, which had been started of late, 
should not be entertained ; that the mass should not be left off, 
nor the celebration of it be hindered, even in those places where 
the reformed doctrine prevailed ; that the anabaptists should be 
proscribed ; that the ministers of the word of God should preach 
it according to the interpretation of the church, and should 
abstain from speaking of any other doctrines till the council 
should meet ; that all the provinces of the empire should live 
in peace, and not commit acts of hostility upon one another, 
under a pretence of religion ; and that one prince should not 
protect the subjects of another," 

The elector John of Saxony (for Frederic was dead), the 
elector of Brandenburg, Ernest and Francis, dukes of Lunen- 
burg, the landgrave of Hesse, and the prince of Anhalt, protested 
against this decree of the diet. Their reasons were, " That they 



MEMOIE. IXXXI 

ouglit not to do anything to infringe upon the determination of 
the former diet, which had granted liberty in religion, till the 
holding of the council ; that that resolution having been taken 
by the unanimous consent of all the members of the empire, 
could not be repealed but by the like consent ; that, in the diet 
of Nuremberg, the original cause of all the differences in reli- 
gion was searched into, and that, to allay them, tliey had offered 
to the pope eighty articles, to which his holiness had given no 
answer ; that the effect of their consultations had always been, 
that the best way to end disputes and reform abuses was to hold 
a council ; that they could not suffer opinions to be forced from 
them, which they judged true and agreeable to the word of God, 
before the council was held ; that their ministers had proved, by 
invincible arguments taken out of Scripture, that the popish mass 
was contrary to the institution of Jesus Christ and the practice 
of the apostles, so that they could not agree to what was ordered 
in the diet ; that they knew the judgment of their churches con- 
cerning the presence of the body and blood of Christ in the 
eucharist ; but that they ought not to make a decree against 
those who were of a contrary opinion, because they were neither 
summoned nor heard ; that they could indeed venture to approve 
of the clause about preaching the gospel according to the inter- 
pretation received in the church, since that did not determine the 
matt(^r, it being yet in dispute what was the true church ; that 
there was nothing more certain than the word of God itself, 
which explains itself, and therefore they would take care that 
nothing else should be taught but the Old and New Testament 
in their purity ; that they are the only infallible rule, and that 
all human traditions are uncertain ; that the decree of the former 
diet was made for the preservation of peace, but that this last 
would infallibly beget wars and troubles. For these reasons 
they could not approve of the decree of the diet, but yet 
would do nothing that should be blameworthy, till a council. 



Ixxxii MEMOIR. 

either general or national, sliould be held." Fourteen cities, viz, 
Strasburg, IN'uremberg, Ulm, Constance, Retlingen, AVindsbeim, 
Memmingen, Lindow, Kempten, Hailbron, Isny, Weissemburg, 
Nortlingen, St. Gall, joined in this protestation, which was put 
into writing, and published April 19th, 1529, by an instru- 
ment, in which they appealed from all that should be done, to 
the emperor, a future council, either general or national, or to 
unsuspected judges ; and accordingly they appointed deputies to 
send to the emperor, to petition that this decree might be re- 
voked. This was the famous protestation, which gave the name 
of Protestants to the reformers in Germany. 

After this, the protestant princes laboured to make a firm 
league among themselves, and with the free cities, that they 
might be able to defend each other against the emperor, and the 
catholic princes. This league had been several times proposed 
before; but, after the protestation just related, they judged it 
necessary not to delay it any longer, and so drew up a form of 
it at Nuremberg. The deputies of the princes and cities having 
met at Swaback, the affair was there proposed ; but the deputies 
of the elector of Saxony alleging, that since this league was 
made for the security of the true Christian doctrine, they ought 
all unanimously to agree about this doctrine ; they ordered, 
therefore, that a summary of their doctrine, contained in several 
heads, should be read, that it might be received, and approved 
unanimously by the whole assembly. The deputies of the pro- 
testants, at the diet of Spires, soon after, viz., September 12th, 
waited upon the emperor at Placentia, where he stayed a little, 
as he returned from his coronation ab Bologna ; and assured him, 
that " their masters had opposed the decree of that diet for no 
other reason but because they foresaw it would occasion many 
troubles ; that they implored his imperial majesty not to think 
ill of them, and to believe, that they would bear their part in the 
war against the Turks, and other charges of the empire, accord- 



MEMOIE. Ixxxiii 

ing to tlieir duty ; that they begged his protection, and a favour- 
able answer to the memorial they had presented him." The 
emperor, content with their submission, promised them an 
answer when he had communicated it to his council : and Octo- 
ber 13th, sent them word in writing, that " the decree of the diet 
seemed to prevent all innovations, and preserve the peace of the 
empire ; that the elector of Saxony and his allies ought to ap- 
prove of it ; that he desired a council as much as they, though 
that would not have been necessary, if the edict of Worms had 
been duly executed ; that what had been once enacted by the 
major part of the members of the diet could not be disannulled 
by the opposition of some of them ; that he had written to the 
elector of Saxony and others, to receive and execute the decree 
of the diet : and hoped they would the sooner submit to his 
order, because union and peace were necessary at this time, 
when the Turk was in Germany." 

The deputies having received this answer, drew up an act of 
appeal, and caused it to be presented to the emperor ; which 
enraged him so extremely, that he confined them to their lodg- 
ings, and forbade them to write into Germany upon pain of death. 
One of the deputies, who happened to be absent when this order 
was given, wrote immediately to the senate of Nuremberg an 
account of what had passed ; and this was transmitted to the 
elector of Saxony, the landgrave of Hesse, and other confede- 
rates, who met at Smalkald in November. Here it was first of 
all proposed, to agree upon a confession of faith ; which accord- 
ingly was prepared, and afterwards offered at the diet of Augs- 
burg, in June, 1530. The emperor would not suffer it to be 
read in a full diet, but only in a special assembly of the princes 
and other members of the empire ; after which the assembly was 
dismissed, that they might consult what resolutions should be 
formed. Some thought that the edict of Worms should be put 
in execution ; others were for referring the matter to the deci- 



Ixxxiv MEMOIR. 

sion of a certain number of honest, learned, and indifferent 
persons ; a third party were for having it confuted by the 
cathoHc divines, and the confutation to be read in a full diet 
before the protestants j and these prevailed. The protestants 
afterwards presented an apology for their confession ; but the 
emperor would not receive it ; they were, however, both made 
public. This confession of faith, which was afterwards called 
"The confession of Augsburg, '^was drawn up by Melancthon, 
the most moderate of all Luther's followers, as was also the apo- 
logy. He revised and corrected it several times, and* as Dupin 
tells us, could hardly please Luther at last. Maimbourg says, 
however, that Luther was exceedingly pleased -with it, when 
Melancthon sent him a copy of it ; and Seckendorf allows that 
Luther was very glad of the opportunity which was offered of 
letting the world know what he and his followers taught. It was 
signed by the elector of Saxony, the marquis of Brandenburg, 
Ernest and Francis, dukes of Brunswick and Lunenburg, the 
landgrave of Hesse, the princes of Anhalt, and the deputies of 
the cities of Nuremberg and E-etlingen. 

Luttier had now nothing else to do but to sit down and con- 
template the mighty work he had finished ; and the remainder 
of his life was spent in exhorting princes, states, and universi- 
ties, to confirm the reformation which had been brought about 
through him, and in publishing from time to time such writ- 
ings as might encourage, direct, and aid them. The emperor 
threatened temporal punishments with armies, and the pope 
eternal with bulls and anathemas ; but Luther cared for none 
of their threats. His friend and coadjutor Melancthon was 
not so indifferent, owing to the moderation and diffidence of 
his temper ; and hence we find many of Luther's letters written 
on purpose to comfort him under his anxieties. "I am," says 
he, in one of these letters, " much weaker than you in private 
conflicts, if I may call those conflicts private which I have with 



MEMOIE. "hCKXY 

the devil ; but you are mucli weaker than me in public. You 
are all diffidence in the public cause ; I, on the contrary, am 
very sanguine, because I am confident it is a just and a true 
cause, the cause of God and of Christ, which need not look pale 
and tremble ; whereas the case is very different with me in my 
private coaflicts, who am a very miserable sinner, and therefore 
have great reason to look pale and tremble. Upon this account 
it is, that I can be almost an indifferent spectator amidst all the 
noisy threats and bullyings of the papists ; for if we fall, the 
kingdom of Christ falls with us ; and, if it should fall, I had 
rather fall with Christ than stand with Csesar." So again a 
little further : " You, Melancthon, cannot bear these disorders, 
and labour to have things transacted by reason, agreeably 
to that spirit of calmness and moderation which your philosophy 
dictates. You might as well attempt to be mad with reason. 
Do not you see that the matter is entirely out of your power 
and management, and that even Christ himself forbids your 
measures to take place ?" This letter was written in 1 530. 

In 1533 Luther wrote a consolatory epistle to the citizens of 
Oschatz, who had suffered some hardships for adhering to the 
Augsburg confession of faith ; in which, among other things, he 
says, " The devil is the host, and the world is his inn, so that 
wherever you come, you shall be sure to find this ugly host." 
He had also about this time a warm controversy with George, 
duke of Saxony, who had such an aversion to Luther's doctrine, 
that he obliged his subjects to take an oath that they would never 
embrace it. Sixty or seventy citizens of Leipsig, however, were 
found to have deviated a little from the catholic doctrine 
in some point or other, and they were known previously to have 
consulted Luther about it ; on which George complained to the 
elector John, that Luther had not only abused his person, but 
also preached up rebellion among his subjects. The elector 
ordered Luther to be acquainted with this, and to be told at the 



Ixxivi MEMOIR. 

same time, that if he did not clear himself of the charge, he 
could not possibly escape punishment. Luther, however, easily 
refuted the accusation, by proving that he had been so far Irom 
stirring up his subjects against him on the score of religion, 
that, on the contrary, he had exhorted them rather to un- 
dergo the greatest hardships, and even to suffer themselves to be 
banished. 

In 1534, the Bible, translated by him into German, was first 
printed, as the old privilege, dated at Bibliopolis, under the 
elector's own hand, shows, and was pubhshed the year after. 
He also published this year a book "against masses and the con- 
secration of priests," in which he relates a conference lie had 
with the devil upon those points ; for it is remarkable in Luther's 
whole history, that he never had any conflicts of any kind within, 
which he did not attribute to the personal agency of the devil.* 
In February, 1537, an assembly was held at Smalkald about 
matters of religion, to which Luther and Melancthon were called. 
At this meeting Luther was seized with so dangerous an illness, 
that there was no hope of his recovery. He was afflicted with 
the stone, and had a stoppage of urine for eleven days. In this 
condition he insisted on travelling, notwithstanding all his friends 
could do to prevent him : his resolution, however, was attended 
- ^ 

* On this subject the following expressions are recorded of 
Luther : — " "VYhen the devil comes to me in the night, I give him 
these and the like answers : — ' Devil ! I must now sleep, for the 
command and ordinance of God is, that we should labour by 
day, and sleep by night.' Then, if he goes on with the old story, 
and accuses me with being a sinner, I say to vex him, ' Soly 
Satan, pray for me!' or else, ' Physician, heal thyself !'" "If 
you would comfort one who is under temptation, you must kill 
Moses and stone the law ; if, on the contrary, he becomes him- 
self again, and forgets his temptation, you must preach the law 
to him ; * let him who has been afflicted, be afiicted no more' 
The best way to drive out the devil, if he will not go for texts of 
Scripture, is to jeer and flout him, for he cannot bear scorn." 



MEMOIE. Ixxxvii 

with a good effect, for the night after his departure he began to 
be better. As he was carried along he made his will, in which 
he bequeathed his detestation of popery to his friends and breth- 
ren ; agreeably to what he often used to say, " Pestis eram 
rivens, moriens ero mors tua, papa;" that is, "I was the plague 
of popery in my life, and shall be its destruction in my death." 

This year the court of Kome, finding it impossible to deal with 
the protestants by force, began to have recourse to stratagem. 
They affected, therefore, to think, that though Luther had indeed 
carried things to a violent extreme, yet what he had pleaded in 
defence of these measures was not entirely without foundation. 
They talked with a seeming show of moderation ; and Pius III., 
who succeeded Clement VII., proposed a reformation first 
among themselves, and even went so far as to fix a place for a 
council to meet at for that purpose. But Luther treated this 
farce as it deserved to be treated ; unmasked and detected it im- 
mediately ; and, to ridicule it the more strongly, caused a pic- 
ture to be drawn, in which was represented the pope seated on 
high upon a throne, some cardinals about him with foxes' tails, 
and seeming to evacuate upwards and downwards, "sursum 
deorsum repurgare," as Melchior Adam expresses it. This was 
fixed against the title-page to let the readers see at once the 
scope and design of the book ; which was, to expose that cunning 
and artifice with which those subtle politicians affected to cleanse 
and purify themselves from their errors and superstitions. Luther 
published about the same time " A Confutation of the pretended 
grant of Constantino to Sylvester bishop of Eome," and also 
" Some letters of John Huss," written from his prison at Con- 
stance to the Bohemians. 

In this manner he was employed till his death, which happened 
in 1546. That year, accompanied by Melancthon, he paid a visit 
to his own country, which he had not seen for many years, and 
returned again in safety. But soon after he was called thither 

9 



Ixxxviii MEMOIE. 

again by the earls of Mansfeldt, to compose some differences which 
had arisen about their boundaries. He had not been used to 
such matters ; but because he was born at Eisleben, a town in the 
territory of Mansfeldt, he was willing to do his country what 
service he could, even in this way. Preaching his last sermon, 
therefore, at Wittemberg, January 17th, he set off on the 23rd ; 
and at Hall in Saxony lodged with Justus Jonas, with whom he 
stayed three days, because the waters were out. On the 28th he 
passed over the river with his three sons, and Jonas ; and being 
in some danger, he said to the doctor, " Do not you think it would 
rejoice the devil exceedingly, if I and you, and my three sons, 
should be drowned?" When he entered the territories of the 
earl of Mansfeldt, he was received by 100 horsemen or more, and 
conducted in a very honourable manner ; but was at the same 
time so very ill that it was feared he would die. He said that 
these fits of sickness often came upon him when he had any 
great business to undertake : of this, however, he did not reco- 
ver, but died February IStli, in his sixty-third year. A little 
before he expired, he admonished those that were about him to 
pray to God for the propagation of the gospel ; " because," said 
he, " the councD. of Trent, which had sat once or twice, and the 
pope, will devise strange things against it." Soon after, his 
body was put into a leaden coffin, and carried with funeral pomp 
to the church at Eisleben, when Jonas preached a sermon upon 
the occasion. The earls of Mansfeldt desired that his body should 
be interred in their territories ; but the elector of Saxony in- 
sisted upon his being brought back to Wittemberg, which was 
accordingly done ; and there he was buried with the greatest 
pomp that perhaps ever happened to any private man. Princes, 
earls, nobles, and students without number, attended the proces- 
sion ; and Melancthon made his funeral oration. 

A thousand falsehoods were invented by the papists about his 
death. Some said that he died suddenly ; others, that he kiUed 



MEMOIE. Ixxxix 

himself; otliers, that the devil strangled him ; others, that his 
corpse stunk so abominably that they were forced to leave it in 
the way as it was carried to be interred. Similar slanders were 
even invented about his death, while he was yet alive; for a pam- 
phlet was published at Naples, and in other places of Italy, the 
year before, wherein was given the following account : " Luther, 
being dangerously sick, desired to communicate, and died as soon 
as he had received the viaticum. As he was dying, he desired 
his body might be laid upon the altar, to be adored ; but that 
request being neglected, he was buried. When, lo ! at his inter- 
ment there arose a furious tem{)est, as if the world was at an end ; 
and the terror was universal. Some, in lifting their hands up to 
heaven, perceived that the host, which the deceased had presumed 
to take, was suspended in the air ; upon which it was gathered 
up with great veneration, and laid in a sacred place, and the 
tempest ceased for the present ; but it arose the night following 
with greater fury, and filled the whole town with consternation ; 
and the next day Luther's sepulchre was found open and empty, 
and a sulphureous stench proceeded from it, which nobody could 
bear. The assistants fell sick of it, and many of them repented, 
and returned to the catholic church." We have related this as a 
specimen of the innumerable falsehoods that the papists have 
invented about Luther ; in which, as Bayle observes very truly, 
they have shewn no regard either to probability, or to the rules 
of the art of slandering, but have assumed all the confidence of 
those who fully believe that the public will blindly and implicitly 
receive their stories, be they ever so absurd and incredible. 
Luther, however, to give the most effectual refutation of this 
account of his death, published an advertisement of his being 
alive ; and wrote a book at the same time to prove that " Papacy 
was founded by the devil." Amidst all this malice of the 
papists towards Luther, we must not forget a generous action 
of the emperor Charles V. which is an exception to it. While 
9^ 



XC MEMOIB. 

Charles' troops quartered at Wittemberg in 1547, one year after 
Luther's death, a soldier gave Luther's effigies, in the church 
of the castle, two stabs with his dagger; and the Spaniards 
earnestly desired that his tomb might be pulled down, and his 
bones dug up and burnt : but the emperor wisely answered, " I 
have nothing further to do with Luther; he has henceforth 
another judge, whose jurisdiction it is not lawful for me to usurp. 
Know, that I make not war with the dead, but with the living, 
who still make war with me." He would not therefore suffer his 
tomb to be demolished ; and he forbad any attempt of that nature 
upon pain of death. 

After this long, but we trust, not uninteresting account of the 
great founder of the Reformation, we shall select only, on the 
part of the Eoman catholics, the opinion of Pere Simon respect- 
ing his talents as an interpreter of scripture, for this is a part of 
his character which must appear very important, as he was the 
first who boldly undertook to reform an overgrown system of 
idolatry and superstition by the pure word of God. " Luther," 
says this critical author, " was the fii'st protestant who ventured 
to translate the Bible into the vulgar tongue from the Hebrew 
text, although he understood Hebrew but very indifferently. As 
he was of a free and bold spirit, he accuses St. Jerome of ignorance 
in the Hebrew tongue ; but he had more reason to accuse him- 
self of this fault, and for having so precipitately undertaken a 
work of this nature, which required more time than he employed 
about it. Thus we find that he was obliged to review his transla- 
tion, and make a second edition ; but, notwithstanding this review, 
the most learned protestants of that time could not approve of 
either the one or the other, and several of them took the liberty 
to mark the faults, which were very numerous." In another place 
he speaks of him not as a translator, but as a commentator, in 
the following manner : " Luther, the German protestants' patri- 
arch, was not satisfied with making a translation of the whole Bible 



MEMOIB. XCl 

both from tlie Hebrew and Greek, into his mother tongne, but 
thought he ought to explain the word of God according to his 
own method, for the better fixing of their minds whom he had 
drawn to his party.* But this patriarch could succeed no better 
in his commentaries upon the Bible than in his translation. He 
made both the one and the other with too little consideration ; 
and he very often consults only his own prejudices. That he 
might be thought a learned man, he spends time to no purpose in 
confuting other people's opinions, which he fancies ridiculous. 
He mixes very improperly theological questions and several other 
things with his commentaries, so that they may rather be called 
lectures, and disputes in divinity, than real commentaries. This 
may be seen in his exposition on Genesis, where there are many 
idle digressions. He thought, that by reading of morality, and 
bawling against those who were not of his opinion, he might 
very much illustrate the word of God ; yet one may easily see by 
his own books, that he was a turbulent and passionate man, who 
had only a little flashy wit and quickness of invention. There is 
nothing great or learned in his commentaries upon the Bible ; 
everything low and mean : and as he had studied divinity, he has 
rather composed a rhapsody of theological questions, than a com- 
mentary upon the scripture text : to which we may add, that he 
wanted understanding, and usually followed his senses instead of 
his reason." 



* In speaking of his translations, he says : — " I sweat blood 
and water in my efibrts to render the Prophets into the vulgar 
tongue. Good God ! what a labour to make these Jew writers 
speak German. They struggle furiously against giving up their 
beautiful language to our barbarous idiom. 'Tis as though you 
would force a nightingale to forget her sweet melody, and sing 
like the cuckoo." (14th June, 1528.) He says, elsewhere, that 
whilst translating the Bible, he sometimes occupied severa,l weeks 
in hunting out, and meditating upon the signification of a single 
word. 



XCll MEMOIE. 

This is tlie language of those in the church of Eome who speak 
of Luther T7ith any degree of moderation ; for the generality- 
allow him neither parts nor learning, nor any attainment intel- 
lectual or moral. They tell you that he was not only no divine, 
but even an outrageous enemy and calumniator of all kinds of 
science ; and that he committed gross, stupid, and abominable 
errors against the principles of divinity and philosophy. They 
accuse him of having confessed, that after struggling for ten years 
together with his conscience, he at last became a perfect master 
of it, and fell into atheism ; and add, that he frequently said he 
would renounce his portion in heaven, provided God would allow 
him a pleasant life for one hundred years upon earth. And, lest we 
should wonder that such monstrous and unheard of impiety 
should be found in a mere human creature, they make no scruple 
to say that an incubus begat him. These, and many more such 
scandalous imputations, Bayle has been at the pains to collect, 
and has treated them with all the contempt and just indignation 
they deserve. 

On the protestant side, the character given of Luther by Dr. 
E-obertson, seems, on the whole, the most just and impartial that 
has yet appeared. " As he was raised by Providence," says this 
excellent historian, " to be the author of one of the greatest and 
most interesting revolutions recorded in history, there is not any 
person, perhaps, whose character has been drawn with such oppo- 
site colours. In his own age, one party, struck with horror and 
inflamed with rage, when they saw with what a daring hand he 
overturned everything which they held to be sacred or valued as 
beneficial, imputed to him not only the defects and vices of a man, 
but the qualities of a demon. The other, warmed with the ad- 
miration and gratitude which they thought he merited, as the 
restorer of light and liberty to the Christian church, ascribed to 
him perfections above the condition of humanity, and viewed all 
his actions with a veneration bordering on that which should be 



MEMOIE. XCIU 

paid only to tliose wlio are guided by the immediate inspiration 
of heaven. It is his own conduct, not the undistinguishing cen- 
sure or the extravagant praise of his contemporaries, that ought 
to regulate the opinions of the present age concerning him. Zeal 
for what he regarded as truth ; undaunted intrepidity to main- 
tain his own system ; abilities, both natural and acquired, to de- 
fend his principles ; and unwearied industry in propagating them ; 
are virtues which shine so conspicuously in every part of his 
behaviour, that even his enemies must allow him to have pos- 
sessed them in an eminent degree. To these may be added, with 
equal justice, such purity and even austerity of manners, as be- 
came one who assumed the character of a reformer ; such sanctity 
of life as suited the doctrine which he delivered ; and such per- 
fect disinterestedness, as affords no slight presumption of hia 
sincerity. Superior to all selfish considerations, a stranger to 
the elegancies of life, and despising its pleasures, he left the 
honours and emoluments of the church to his disciples, remaining 
satisfied himself in his original state of professor in the university, 
and pastor of the town of "Wittemberg, with the moderate ap- 
pointments annexed to these offices. His extraordinary quaHties 
were allayed by no inconsiderable mixture of human frailties and 
human passions. These, however, were of such a nature, that 
they cannot be imputed to malevolence or corruption of heart, 
but seem to have taken their rise from the same source with many 
of his virtues.* His mind, forcible and vehement in all its opera- 
tions, roused by gTeat objects, or agitated by violent passions. 



* To this sketch may be added : — Luther was fond of simple 
enjoyments. He often joined his guests, in their musical enter- 
tainments, and played at skittles with them. Melancthon says 
of him : " Whoever was familiarly acquainted with Luther, and 
knew his habits, will allow that he was a most excellent man, 
agreeable and gentle in society, and in no respect dogmatic, 
or a lover of disputation, yet witli all the gravity becoming his 
character." 



XCIV MEMOIE. 

broke out, on many occasions, witli an impetuosity whicli asto- 
nislies men of feebler spirits, or such as are placed in a more 
tranquil situation. By carrying some praiseworthy dispositions 
to excess, he bordered sometimes on what was culpable, and was 
often betrayed into actions which exposed him to censure. His 
confidence that his own opinions were well founded, approached 
to arrogance ; his courage in asserting them, to rashness ; his 
firmness in adhering to them, to obstinacy ; and his zeal in con- 
futing his adversaries, to rage and scurrility. Accustomed him- 
self to consider everything as subordinate to truth, he expected 
the same deference for it from other men ; and, without making 
any allowances for their timidity or prejudices, he poured forth 
against such as disappointed him in this particular, a torrent of 
invective mingled with contempt. Eegardless of any distinction 
of rank or character when his doctrines were attacked, he chastised 
all his adversaries indiscriminately, with the same rough hand : 
neither the royal dignity of Henry YIII., nor the eminent learn- 
ing and abihties of Erasmus, screened them from the same gross 
abuse with which he treated Tetzel or Eckius. 

" But these indecencies of which Luther was guilty, must not 
be imputed wholly to the violence of his temper. They ought to 
be charged in part on the manners of the age. Among a rude 
people, unacquainted with those maxims, which, by putting con- 
straint on the passions of individuals, have polished society, and 
rendered it agreeable, disputes of every kind were managed with 
heat, and strong emotions were uttered in their natural language 
without reserve or deHcacy. At the same time, the works of 
learned men were all composed in Latiri ; and they were not only 
authorized, by the example of eminent writers in that language, 
to use their antagonists with the most illiberal scurrility ; but, in 
a dead tongue, indecencies of every kind appear less shocking 
than in a hving language, whose idioms and phrases seem gross, 
because they are familiar. 



MEMOIK. XCV 

" In passing judgment upon the cliaraeters of men, we ought 
to try them by the principles and maxims of their own age, not 
by those of another. For, although virtue and vice are at all 
times the same, manners and customs vary continually. Some 
parts of Luther's behaviour which to us appear most culpable, 
gave no disgust to his contemporaries. It was even by some of 
those qualities which we are now apt to blame, that he was fitted 
for accomplishing the great work he undertook. To rouse man- 
kind, when sunk in ignorance or superstition, and to encounter 
the rage of bigotry armed with power, required the utmost 
vehemence of zeal, as well as a temper daring to excess. A gentle 
call would neither have reached, nor have excited those to whom 
it was addressed, A spirit more amiable, but less vigorous than 
Luther's, would have shrunk back from the dangers which he 
braved and surmounted. Towards the close of Luther's life, 
though without any perceptible diminution of his zeal or abihties, 
the infirmities of his temper increased upon him, so that he grew 
daily more peevish, more irascible, and more impatient of contra- 
diction. Having lived to be a witness of his own amazing success ; 
to see a great part of Europe embrace his doctrines ; and to shake 
the foundation of the papal throne, before which the mightiest 
monarchs had trembled, he discovered, on some occasions symp- 
toms of vanity and self-applause. He must have been, indeed, 
more than man, if, upon contemplating all that he actually accom- 
plished, he had never felt any sentiments of this kind rising in 
his breast." 

His works were collected after his death, and printed at Wit- 
temberg in seven volumes foHo. Catherine von Bora survived her 
husband a few years, and continued the first year of her widow- 
hood at Wittemberg, though Luther had advised her to seek 
another place of residence. She went from thence in 1547, when 
the town was surrendered to the emperor Charles V. Before 
her departure, she had received a present of fifty crowns from 



XCtl MEMOIE. 

Christian III. king of Denmark ; and the elector of Saxony, and 
the counts of Mansfeldt, gave her good tokens of their liberality. 
"With these additions to what Luther had left her, she was enabled 
to maintain herself and her family handsomely. She returned to 
"Wittemberg when the town was restored to the elector, where 
she lived a very devout and pious life, till the plague obhged her 
to leave it again in 1552. She sold what she had at Wittemberg, 
and retired to Torgau, with a resolution to end her life there. 
An unfortunate mischance befel her in her journey thither, which 
proved fatal to her. The horses growing unruly, and attempting 
to run away, she leaped out of the vehicle, and had a fall, of which 
she died about a quarter of a year after, at Torgau, Dec. 20th, 
1552. She was buried there in the great church, where her tomb 
and epitaph are still to be seen ; and the -university of Wittem- 
berg, which was then at Torgau because the plague raged at 
Wittemberg, made a public programma concerning the funeral 
pomp.* 

Lutheranism has undergone some alteration since the time of 
its founder. Luther rejected the epistle of St. James, as incon- 
sistent with the doctrine of St. Paul, in relation to justification ; 
he also set aside the Apocalypse ; both which are now received as 



* Audin (the Catholic biographer) gives a somewhat different 
account of the last days of Luther's widow. He says : " The 
Protestant princes soon forgot her. Some years after the death 
of her husband, she was involved in the deepest distress, and 
had not bread to give her children. Even king Christian gave 
her assistance on only one occasion. After wandering about, 
and begging her bread for some years, she died in 1552, at 
Torgau, and was buried in the parish church there. The F elites 
Affiches of Altona, for the 15th of November, 1837, contains the 
following advertisement, headed " Luther's Orphans :" — 

" These are the children of Joseph Charles Luther, born at 
Erfurt, 11th November, 1792, and who returned to the Catholic 
church. He died in Bohemia. 

" M. Heinthaler, administrator of the institution of St. Martin, 



MEMOIE. XCVll 

canonical in the Latlieran cliurch. Luther reduced the number 
of sacraments to two, viz., baptism, and the eucharist ; but he 
believed the impanation, or consubstantiation : that is, that the 
matter of the bread and wine remain with the body and blood of 
Christ ; and it is in this article, that the main difference between 
the Lutheran and English churches consists. Luther maintained 
the mass to be no sacrifice ; he exploded the adoration of the 
host, auricular confession, meritorious works, indulgences, pur- 
gatories, the worship of images, &c. which had been introduced 
in the corrupt times of the Eomish church. He also opposed the 
doctrine of free-will ; maintained predestination ; asserted that 
we are necessitated in all we do ; that all our actions done in a 
state of sin, and even the virtues themselves of heathens, are 
crimes ; that we are justified only by the merits and satisfaction 
of Christ. He also opposed the fastings in the Roman church, 
monastical vows, the celibacy of the clergy, &e. 



erected at Erfurt in honour of Luther, has received these poor 
orphans under his care. 

" On May Gth, 1830, Antony, the eldest, born in 1821, came 
to the ancient convent of the Augustines. Instructed in the 
principles of the Eeformation, he made his first communion at 
Easter. He has since been apprenticed to a cabinet-maker. 
Two of his sisters, Mary and Ann, are at service in an inn ; the 
youngest, Theresa, is at school." 

M. Eeintlialer made this appeal to his co-religionists (the 
Protestants) with scarcely any effect. Frankfurt-on-the-Maine 
and Leipzig sent fifty thalers, and that was all. 



THE 

CATECHISM OF DR. MARTIN LUTHER. 



I. THE FIEST HEAD. 
The Holy Ten Commandments of God, oe the Decalogue. 

God spake these words, and said, I am the Lord thy Grod. 
The First Commandment. 

ThoTi shalt have no other Gods but me. Thou shalt not make to thyself 
any graven image, nor the likeness of any thing that is in heaven above oi 
in the earth beneath, or in the water under the earth. Thou shalt not 
bow down to them, nor worship them : for I the Lord thy God am a jealous 
God, and visit the sins of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and 
fourth generation of them that hate me : and shew mercy unto thousands 
in them that love me, and keep my commandments. 

What doth this Commandment teach ? 
That we ought to fear and love God above all things, and to put our 
trust in him only. 

The Second Commandment. 
Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain : for the 
Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain. 

What doth this Commandment teach ? 

That we ought to fear and love God, and to avoid profane cursing, im- 
precations, conjurations, lies and deceits, by his holy name ; and that in 
all our wants we must call upon that name, worship it, and praise it with 
thanksgivings. 

The Third Commandment. 

Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath-day. Six days shalt thou 
labour, and do all that thou hast to do ; but the seventh day is the Sabbath 
of the Lord thy God : in it thou shalt do no manner of work, thou, and 
thy son, and thy daughter, thy man-servant and thy maid-servant, thy 
cattle, and the stranger that is within thy gates. For in six days the Lord 
made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the 
seventh day : wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh day and hallowed it. 

What doth this Commandment teach ? 
That we ought to fear and love God, and not despise godly preaching or 
his Word ; but that we account it holy, willingly hear and learn it. 

The Fourth Commandment. 
Honour thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the 
land, which the Lord thy God giveth thee. 

What doth this Commandment teach ? 
That we ought to fear and love God, and not despise our parents or 
superiors, neither provoke them to anger, but honour them, serve them, 
reverence them, love and highly esteem them. 



LUTHEE S CATECHISM. XCIX 

The Fifth Commandment. 
Thou sbalt do no murder. 

What cloth this Commandment teach ? 
That we ought to fear and love God, and not to molest or damage the 
life of our neighbour, but that we assist him and serve him in every want 
or danger both of soul and body. 

The Sixth Commandment. 
Thou shalt not commit adultery. 

What cloth this Commandment teach ? 
That we ought to fear and love God, that we may live modestly and 
chastely both in word and deed ; and that all who are married do love and 
honour each other. 

The Seventh Commandment, 
Thou shalt not steal. 

What doth this Commandment teach ? 
That we ought to fear and love God, and not take away from our neigh- 
bour his goods or money, or obtain them by fraud or bad wares ; but that 
we labour to preserve his substance, and better his circumstances. 

The Eighth Commandment. 
Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour. 

What doth this Commandment teach ? 
That we ought to fear and love God, and not to distress, betray, or 
traduce our neighbour by any falsehood, nor bring any infamy upon him ; 
but that we excuse for him, think and speak well of him, and that we 
receive and interpret all things of him in a favourable Kght. 

The Ninth Commandment. 
Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house. 

What cloth this Commandment teach ? 
That v/e ought to fear and love God, and not seize by wicked cunning 
the inheritance or house of our neighbour, and under shadow of right or 
law annex them to our owoi ; but rather we ought to assist him, that his 
property may be kept entire. 

The Tenth Commandment. 
Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, 
nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is his. 

What doth this Commandment teach ? 
That we ought to fear and love God, so that we do not alienate from our 
neighbour, or withdraw from him his wife, his man-servants, his maid- 
servants, or his cattle; but that we exhort, urge and admonish them 
severally with all diligence to discharge their duty. 

What saith God generally concerning all these Commandments ? 
I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the 
fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation of them 
that hate me, and showing mercy unto thousands on them that love me, 
and keep my commandments. 

What do these words mean ? 
God threateneth punishment to all that transgress and violate his com- 
mands; we ought therefore to tremble at and fear God's wrath, and to do 



c liithee's catechism. 

nothing against his commands ; again he also promises his grace, and all 
good things to all who keep his commandments ; therefore we ought to 
love Grod and trust in him, and to frame earnestly and diligently our lives 
always according to his commands. 

II. THE SECOND HEAD. 

The Apostles' Ceeed. 

The First Aeticle. — Op Creation. 

I BELIEVE in Grod the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth. 

What meaneth this Article ? 
I believe that God hath created me together with all creatures ; that he 
hath given me a body, a soul, eyes, ears, and all my members, reason, and 
all my senses, and these he still preserveth. Moreover that he plentifully 
and daily giveth me food and raiment, an habitation, wife, children, lands, 
flocks, and all good things, with all the necessaries of life ; that he pro- 
tecteth me against all dangers, freeth and delivereth me from all evils, and 
he doth all these things out of his mere fatherly and divine goodness and 
mercy, without any desert of mine, or any worth ; for all which things I 
deservedly ought with all my might to thank, to praise, to worship and 
obey him. This is most assuredly true. 

The Second Article. — Op Redemption. 
And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, who was conceived by the 
Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was 
crucified, dead and buried ; he descended into hell ; the third day he rose 
again from the dead ; he ascended into heaven, and sitteth on the right 
hand of God the Father Almighty ; from thence he shall come to judge the 
quick and the dead. 

What meaneth this Article ? 
I believe that Jesus Christ, the true God, and also true man, born of 
the Virgin Mary, is my Lord, who hath redeemed me a lost and con- 
demned man, and hath delivered me from all sins, from death, and the 
power of Satan ; not with gold and silver, but with his holy and precious 
blood, and by his innocent sufferings and death, that I might be wholly 
his, and might live under him in his kingdom, and serve him in ever- 
lasting righteousness, innocency, and happiness, in like manner as he him- 
self rose from the dead, and liveth and reigneth for ever and ever. This 
is most assuredly true. 

The Third Article. — Op Sanctification. 
I believe in the Holy Ghost ; the holy catholic church ; the communion 
of saints ; the forgiveness of sins ; the resurrection of the body, and the 
life everlasting. Amen. 

What meaneth this Article ? 
I believe that I, by the strength of my o\m reason, can by no means 
believe in Jesus Christ, or approach or come unto him; but the Holy 
Ghost through the Gospel hath called me and enlightened me with his 
gifts, sanctified me by a true faith, and has preserved me ; even as he is 
wont to call, to assemble, to enlighten, and to sanctify the whole church 
throughout the world, and to preserve them by Jesus Christ in the only 
true faith : in which church he daily doth most mercifully forgive all sins 



LrTHEE S CATECHISM. CI 

to me, and all Christians, and in the last day will raise ns all from the 
dead, and will give everlasting life to me, and to all that truly believe in 
Christ. This is most assi;redly true. 

III. THE THIED HEAD. 
The Loed's Peayee. 

Preface. 
Our Father, who art in Heaven. 

What meaneth these words ? 
God lovingly inviteth us, in this little preface, truly to believe in 
him, that he is our true Father and that we are truly his children, so 
that full of confidence we may more boldly call upon his name, even as 
we see children with a kind of confidence ask anything of their parents. 
The First Petition. 
Hallowed be thy name. 

What meaneth this Petition ? 
The name of God truly is of itself holy, but we ask in this petition that 
it may be hallowed by us. 

How doth that come to pass? 
When the Word of God is taught with purity and sincerity, and we, 
as becometh children of God, live godly according thereto; which, that 
it may be the case, vouchsafe us, O my Father, who art in heaven ! 
But whoso teacheth and practiseth it otherwise than God's Word 
teacheth, he profaneth God's name amongst us ; forbid this from coming 
to pass, my heavenly Father ! 

The Second Petition. 
Thy kingdom come. 

What meaneth this Petition? 
The kingdom of God truly cometh of itself without our prayers, but by 
this petition we pray also, that it may come unto us. 
How cometh that to pass ? 
When the heavenly Father giveth us his Holy Spirit, who worketh by 
his grace so, that we believe his Holy Word, and live a godly life both in 
time and eternity. 

The Third Petition. 
Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. 

What meaneth this Petition ? 
The good and merciful will of God is done even without our prayers, but 
we ask in this petition, that it may be done by us. 
How cometh that to pass ? 
When God breaketh and hindereth every evil counsel, will, and attempt, so 
working that we the less sanctify the name of God, and whereby the coming 
of his kingdom to us is prevented ; such is the will of the devil, the world, 
and our own flesh ; but comforteth and preserveth us steadily in his word 
and faith to the end of our life ; this is the good and merciful will of God. 
The Fourth Petition. 
Hive us this day our daily bread. 



til ltjthee's catechism. 

What meaneih this Petition ? 
Grod giveth indeed to all daily bread, though we ask it not, and that to 
•wicked men ; but we pray in this petition, that we may acknowledge this 
benefit, and so may receive our daily bread with thanksgiying. 

What do you mean by daily bread? 
I mean by it every thing that belongeth to the want and supply of our 
life ; that is, meat, drink, clothes, dwelling, gardens, lands, flocks, money, 
wealth, happy marriage, virtuous children, faithful servants, upright and 
just magistrates, peaceful government, wholesome air, quietness, health, 
modesty, honour, true friends, faithful neighbours, and other things of the 
like kind. 

The Fifth Petition. 
And forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against 
us. 

What meaneth this Petition ? 
We ask in this prayer, that our Heavenly Father would not look upon 
and examine our sins, and reject our prayers upon that account ; seeing, we 
are worthy of none of those things which we ask, neither are we able to 
deserve anything, but that he would give us all things through his grace 
and goodness ; because every day we sin many times, and deserve only 
punishment : and on the other hand, that we may heartily forgive what- 
soever others have done against us, and freely render good for evil. 
The Sixth Petition. 
And lead us not into temptation. 

What meaneth this Petition ? 
God indeed tempteth no man ; but yet we ask, in this petition, that he 
would keep and preserve us, lest the devil, the world, and our own flesh 
delude and draw us away from the true faith, and throw us into supersti- 
tion, distrust, despair, and other gi-ievous sins and wickedness ; and that, 
if we should be tempted therewith even to the highest degree, we still may 
conquer, and at last triumph over them. 

The Seventh Petition. 
But deliver us from evil. 

What meaneth this Petition ? 
We beg in this prayer, as it were the whole, that our Heavenly Father 
would deliver us from all evils and dangers of body and soul, of goods, and 
of honour ; and that, when the hour of death cometh, he would give us a 
happy departure out of this world, and through his gracious goodness 
would receive us out of this valley of misery xinto himself in heaven. 
Conclusion. 
For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever and 
ever, Amen. 

What is the meaning of this word, Amen ? 
Amen meaneth assuredly, namely, that I am sure that petitions of this 
kind are accepted by my Heavenly Father, and heard by him, because he 
hath commanded us, that we should pray after this manner, and hath pro- 
mised that he will hear us. Amen, Amen : that is, truly, certainly, so 
belt. 



LUTHER'S TABLE-TALK. 



OF GOD'S WORD. 



That the Bible is God's word and book I prove thus: All 
things that have been, and are, in the world, and the manner 
of their being, are described in the first book of Moses on 
the creation; even as God made and shaped the world, so 
does it stand to this day. Infinite potentates have raged 
against this book, and sought to destroy and uproot it — king 
Alexander the Great, the princes of Egypt and of Babylon, 
the monarchs of Persia, of Greece, and of iiome, the empe- 
rors Julius and Augustus — but they nothing prevailed; they 
are all gone and vanished, while the book remains, and will 
remain for ever and ever, perfect and entire, as it was de- 
clared at the first. Who has thus helped it — who has thus 
protected it against such mighty forces? No one, surely, but 
God himself, who is the master of all things. And "tis no 
small miracle how God has so long preserved and protected 
this book; for the devil and the world are sore foes to it. I 
believe that the devil has destroyed many good books of the 
church, as, aforetime, he killed and crushed many holy per- 
sons, the memory of whom has now passed away; but the 
Bible he was fain to leave subsisting. In like manner have 
baptism, the sacrament of the altar, of the true body and 
blood of Christ, and the office of preaching remained unto 
us, despite the infinitude of tyrants and heretic persecutors. 
God, with singular strength, has upheld these things; let us, 
then, baptize, administer the sacrament, and preach, fear- 

B 



2 Luther's table-talk. 

less of impediment. Homer, Virgil, and other noble, fine, 
and profitable writers, have left us books of great antiquity; 
but they are nought to the Bible. 

While the Romish church stood, the Bible was never given 
to the people in such a shape that they could clearly, under- 
standingly, surely, and easily read it, as they now can in the 
German translation, which, thank God, we have prepared 
here at Wittenberg. 

lU 

The Holy Scriptures are full of divine gifts and virtues. 
The books of the hgathen taught nothing of faith, hope, or 
charity; they present no idea of these things; they contem- 
plate only the present, and that which man, with the use of 
his material reason, can grasp and comprehend. Look not 
therein for aught of hope or trust in God. But see how the 
Psalms and the Book of Job treat of faith, hope, resignation, 
and prayer; in a w^ord, the Holy Scripture is the highest and 
best of books, abounding in comfort under all afflictions and 
trials. It teaches us to see, to feel, to grasp, and to compre- 
hend faith, hope, and charity, far otherwise than mere human 
reason can; and when evil oppresses us, it teaches how these 
virtues throw light upon the darkness, and how, after this 
poor, miserable existence of ours on earth, there is another 
and an eternal life. 

III. 

St. Jerome, after he had revised and corrected the Sep- 
tuagint, translated the Bible from Hebrew into Latin; his 
version is still used in our church. Truly, for one man, this 
was work enough and to spare. Nulla enim privata per- 
sona tantum efficere potuissef. 'Twould have been quite as 
well had he called to his aid one or two learned men, for the 
Holy Ghost would then have more powerfully manifested 
itself unto him, according to the words of Christ: "Where 
two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I 
in the midst of them." Interpreters and translators should 
not work alone; for good et propria verba do not always 
occur to one mind. 

IV. 

We ought not to criticise, explain, or judge the Scriptures 
by our mere reason, but diligently, with prayer, meditate 



OF god's word. 3 

thereon, and seek their meaning. The devil and temptations 
also afford us occasion to learn and understand the Scriptures, 
by experience and practice. Without these we should never 
understand them, however diligently we read and listened to 
them. The Holy Ghost must here be our only master and 
tutor ; and let youth have no shame to learn of that preceptor. 
When I find myself assailed by temptation. I forthwith lay 
hold of some text of the Bible, which Jesus extends to me; as 
this: that he died for me, whence I derive infinite hope. 

V. 

He who has made himself master of the principles and 
text of the word, runs little risk of committing errors. A 
theologian should be thoroughly in possession of the basis 
and source of faith — that is to say, the Holy Scriptures. 
Armed with this knowledge it was that I confounded and 
silenced all my adversaries; for they seek not to fathom and 
understand the Scriptures; they run them over negligently 
and drowsily; they speak, they write, they teach, according 
to the suggestion of their heedless imaginations. My counsel 
is, that we draw water from the true source and fountain, 
that is, that we diligently search the Scriptures. He who 
wholly possesses the text of the Bible, is a consummate divine. 
One single verse, one sentence of the text, is of far moie 
instruction than a whole host of glosses and commentaries, 
which are neither strongly penetrating nor armour of proof. 
As, when I have that text before me of St. Paul: "All the 
creatures of God are good, if they be received with thanks- 
giving," this text shows, that what God has made is good. 
Now eating, drinking, marrying, &c., are of God's making, 
therefore they are good. Yet the glosses of the primitive 
fathers are against this text: for Bernard, Basil, Jerome, 
and others, have written to far other purpose. But I prefer 
the text to them all, though, in popedom, the glosses were 
deemed of higher value than the bright and clear text. 

VI. 

Let us not lose the Bible, but with diligence, in fear and 
invocation of God, read and preach it. While that rfemains 
and flourishes, all prospers with the state; 'tis head and 
empress of all arts and faculties. Let but divinity fall, and 
I would not give a straw for the rest. 

b2 



LUTHER S TABLE-TALK. 



The school divines, with their speculations in holj writ, 
deal in pure vanities, in mere imaginings derived from human 
reason. Bonaventura, who is full of them, made me almost 
deaf. I sought to learn in his book, how God and my soul 
had become reconciled, but got no information from him. 
They talk much of the union of the will and understanding, 
but 'tis all idle fantasy. The right, practical divinity is this: 
Believe in Christ, and do thy duty in that state of life to 
which God has called thee. In like manner, the Mystical 
divinity of Dionysius is a mere fable and lie. With Plato 
he chatters: Omnia sunt non ens, et omnia sunt ens — (all is 
something, and aU is nothing) — and so leaves things hanging. 



Dr. Jonas Justus remarked at Luther's table: There is in 
the Holy Scripture a wisdom so profound, that no man may 
thoroughly study it or comprehend it. " Ay," said Luther, 
" we must ever remain scholars here; we cannot sound the 
depth of one single verse in Scripture; we get hold but of 
the ABC, and that imperfectly. Who can so exalt himself 
as to comprehend this one line of St. Peter: ' Rejoice, inas- 
much as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings.' Here St. 
Peter would have us rejoice in our deepest misery and 
trouble, like as a child kisses the rod." 

IX. 

The Holy Scriptures surpass in efficaciousness all the arts 
and all the sciences of the philosophers and jurists; these, 
though good and necessary to life here below, are vain and of no 
effect as to what concerns the life eternal. The Bible should 
be regarded with W' holly different eyes from those with which 
we view other productions. He who wholly renounces him- 
self, and relies not on mere human reason, will make good 
progress in the Scriptures; but the world comprehends them 
not, from ignorance of that mortification which is the gift of 
God's word. Can he who understands not God's word, un- 
derstand God's works? This is manifest in Adam: he called 
his first-born son, Cain — that is, possessor, house-lord; this 
son, Adam and Eve thought, would be the man of God, the 
blessed seed that would crush the serpent's head. After- 



OF GOD S WORD. O 

wards, when Eve was with child again, they hoped to have 
a daughter, that their beloved son, Cain, might have a wife; 
but Eve bearing again a son, called him Abel — that is, 
vanity and nothingness; as much as to say, my hope is gone, 
and I am deceived. This was an image of the world and of 
God's church, showing how things have ever gone. The 
ungodly Cain was a great lord in the world, while Abel, that 
upright and pious man, was an outcast, subject and oppressed. 
But before God, the case was quite contrary: Cain was 
rejected of God, Abel accepted and received as God's beloved 
child. The like is daily seen here on earth, therefore let us 
not heed its doings. Ishmael's was also a fair name — hearer 
of God — while Isaac's was naught. Esau's name means 
actor^ the man that shall do the work — Jacob's was 
naught. The name Absalom, signifies father of peace. Such 
fair and glorious colours do the ungodly ever bear in this 
world, while in truth and deed they are contemners, scoffers, 
and rebels to the word of God. But by that word, we, 
God be praised, are able to discern and know all such; 
therefore let us hold the Bible in precious esteem, and dili- 
gently read it. 

To world wisdom, there seems no lighter or more easy art 
than divinity, and the understanding of God's word, so that 
the children of the world will be reputed fully versed in the 
Scriptures and catechism, but they shoot far from the mark. 
I would give all my fingers, save three to write with, could I 
find divinity so easy and light as they take it to be. The 
reason why men deem it so is, that they become soon wearied, 
and think they know enough of it. So we found it in the 
world, and so we must leave it; but in fine videbitur, cujus 
toni. 

X. 

I have many times essayed thoroughly to investigate tn» 
ten commandments, but at the very outset, " I am the Lord 
thy God," I stuck fast; that very one word, I, put me to 
a non-plus. He that has but one word of God before him, 
and out of that word cannot make a sermon, can never be a 
preacher. I am well content that I know, however little, of 
what God's word is, and take good heed not to murmur at 
my small knowledge. 



LUTHER S TABLE-TALK. 



XI. 



I have grounded mj preaching upon the literal word; he 
that pleases may follow me; he that will not may stay. I 
call upon St. Peter, St. Paul, Moses, and all the Saints, to 
say whether they ever fundamentally comprehended one single 
word of God, without studying it over and over and over 
again. The Psalm says : Ilis understanding is infinite. The 
saints, indeed, know God's word, and can discourse of it, 
but the practice is another matter; therein we shall ever 
remain scholars. 

The school theologians have a fine similitude hereupon, 
that it is as with a sphere or globe, which, lying on a table, 
touches it only with one point, yet it is the whole table which 
supports the globe. Though I am an old doctor of divi- 
nity, to this day I have not got beyond the children's learn- 
ing — the Ten Commandments, the Belief, and the Lord's 
Prayer ; and these I understand not so well as I should, 
though I study them daily, praying, with my son John and 
my daughter Magdalen. If I thoroughly appreciated these 
first words of the Lord's Prayer, Our Father^ which art in 
Heaven^ and really believed that God, who made heaven and 
earth, and all creatures, and has all things in his hand, was 
my Father, then should I certainly conclude with myself, 
that I also am a lord of heaven and earth, that Christ is my 
brother, Gabriel my servant, Raphael my coachman, and all 
the angels my attendants at need, given unto me by my 
heavenly Father, to keep me in the path, that unawares I 
knock not my foot against a stone. But that our faith may 
be exercised and confirmed, our heavenly Father suffers us 
to be cast into dungeons, or plunged in water. So we may 
see how finely we understand these words, and how belief 
shakes, and how great our weakness is, so that we begin to 
think — Ah, who knows how far that is true which is set 
forth in the Scriptures? 

XII. 

No greater mischief can happen to a Christian people, than 
to have God's word taken from them, or falsified, so that 
they no longer have it pure and clear. God grant we and 
our descendants be not witnesses of such a calamity. 



OF GOD S TT-ORD, 7 

XIII. 

When we hare God's word pure and clear, then we think 
ourselves all right; we become negligent, and repose in a 
vain security; we no longer pay due heed, thinking it will 
always so remain; we do not watch and pray against the 
devil, who is ready to tear the Divine word out of our hearts. 
It is with us as with travellers, who, so long as they are on 
'he highway, are tranquil and heedless, but if they go astray 
into woods or cross paths, uneasily seek which way to take, 
this or that. 

XIV. 

The great men and the doctors understand not the word 
of God, but it is revealed to the humble and to children, as is 
testified by the Saviour in the Gospel according to St. Mat- 
thew, xi. 25: "0 Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because 
thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and 
hast revealed them unto babes." Gregory says, well and 
rightly, that the Holy Scripture is a stream of running water, 
where alike the elephant may swim, and the lamb walk with- 
out losing its feet. 

XV. 

The great unthankfulness, contempt of God's word, and 
v/ilfulness of the world, make me fear that the divine light 
will soon cease to shine on man, for God's word has ever had 
its certain course. 

In the time of the kings of Judah, Baal obscured the 
brightness of God's word, and it became hard labour to 
destroy his empire over the hearts of men. Even in the time 
of the apostles, there were heresies, errors, and evil doctrines 
spread abroad by false brethren. Next came Arius, and the 
word of God was hidden behind dark clouds, but the holy 
fathers, Ambrose, Hilary, Augustin, Athanasius, and others, 
dispersed the obscurity. Greece and many other countries 
have heard the word of God, but have since abandoned it, 
and it is to be feared even now it may quit Germany, and 
go into other lands. I hope the last day will not be long de- 
layed. The darkness grows thicker around us, and godly -j- 
servants of the Most High become rarer and more rare. Im- 
piety and licentiousness are rampant throughout the world, 



8 Luther's table-talk. 

and we live like pigs, like wild beasts, devoid of all reason. 
But a voice will soon be heard thundering forth: Behold, the 
bridegroom cometh. God will not be able to bear this wicked 
world much longer, but will come, with the dreadful day, 
and chastise the scorners of his word. 

XVI. 

Kings, princes, lords, any one will needs understand the gos- 
pel far better than I, Martin Luther, ay, or even than St. Paul; 
for they deem themselves wise and full of policy. But herein 
they scorn and contemn, not us, poor preachers and ministers, 
but the Lord and Governor of all preachers and ministers, 
who has sent us to preach and teach, and who will scorn and 
contemn them in such sort, that they shall smart again; even 
He that says: " Whoso heareth you, heareth me; and whoso 
toucheth you, toucheth the apple of mine eye." The great J^ 
ones would govern, but they know not how. 

XVII. 

Dr. Justus Jonas told Dr. Martin Luther of a noble 
and powerful Misnian, who above all things occupied himself 
in amassing gold and silver, and was so buried in darkness, 
that he gave no heed to the five books of Moses, and had 
even said to Duke John Frederic, who was discoursing with 
him upon the gospel : " Sir, the gospel pays no interest." 
" Have you no grains?" interposed Luther; and then told 
this fable : — " A lion making a great feast, invited all the 
beasts, and with them some swine. When all manner of 
dainties were set before the guests, the swine asked : ' Have 
you no grains?' " " Even so," continued the doctor, " even 
so, in these days, it is with our epicureans: we preachers 
set before them, in our churches, the most dainty and costly 
dishes, as everlasting salvation, the remission of sins, and 
God's grace; but they, like swine, tur;i up their snouts, and 
ask for guilders : offer a cow nutmeg, and she will reject it for 
old hay. This reminds me of the answer of certain parish- 
ioners to their minister, Ambrose R. He had been earnestly 
exhorting them to come and listen to the Word of God: 
* Well,' said they, ' if you will tap a good barrel of beer for 
us, we'll come with all our hearts and hear you.' The 
gospel at Wittenberg the rain which, falling 



OF GOD S WORD. if 

upon a river, produces little effect; but descending upon a 
dry, thirsty soil, renders it fertile." 

XVIIl. 

Some one asked Luther for his psalter, which was old and 
ragged, promising to give him a new one in exchange; but 
the doctor refused, because he was used to his own old copy, 
adding : " A local memory is very useful, and I have, weak- 
ened mine in translating the Bible." 

XIX. 

Our case will go on, so long as its living advocates. Me- 
lancthon, and other pious and learned persons, who apply 
themselves zealously to the work, shall be alive; but, after 
their death, 'twill be a sad falling off. We have an example 
before us, in Judges ii. 10: "And also all that generation 
were gathered unto their fathers; and there arose another . 
generation after them, which knew not the Lord, nor yet the 
works which he had done for Israel." So, after the death of 
the apostles, there were fearful fallings off ; nay, even while 
they yet lived, as St. Paul complains, there was falling off 
among the Galatians, the Corinthians, and in Asia. We 
shall be occasioned much suffering and loss by the Sacramen- 
tarians, the Anabaptists, the Antinomians, and other secta- 
ries. 

XX. 

Oh! how great and glorious a thing it is to have before 
one the Word of God! With that we may at all times feel 
joyous and secure; we need never be in want of consolation, 
for we see before us, in all its brightness, the pure and right 
way. He who loses sight of the word of God, falls into -j" 
despair; the voice of heaven no longer sustains him; he fol- 
lows only the disorderly tendency of his heart, and of world 
vanity, which lead him on to his destruction. 



Christ, in Matthew, v., vi., vii., teaches briefly these points: 
first, as to the eight happinesses or blessings, how every 
Christian ought particularly to live as it concerns himself; 
secondly, of the office of teaching, what and how a man ought 
to teach in the church, how to season with salt and enlighten, 



10 Luther's table-talk. 

reprove, and comfort, and exercise the faith; thirdly, he con- 
futes and opposes the false expounding of the law; fourthly, 
he condemns the wicked hypocritical kind of living; fifthly, 
he teaches what are upright and good works ; sixthly, he 
warns men of false doctrine ; seventhly, he clears and solves 
what might be found doubtful and confused; eighthly, he 
condemns the hypocrites and false saints, who abuse the pre- 
cious word of grace. 

XXII. 

St. Luke describes Christ's passion better than the rest; 
John is more complete as to Christ's works; he describes the 
audience, and how the cause was handled, and how they pro- 
ceeded before the seat of judgment, and how Christ was 
questioned, and for what cause he was slain. 

When Pilate asked him: " Art thou the king of the Jews?'* 
" Yea," said Christ, " I am; but not such a king as the emperor 
is, for then my servants and armies would fight and strive to 
deliver and defend me; but I am a king sent to preach the 
gospel, and give record of the truth which I must speak." 
" What!" said Pilate, " art thou such a king, and hast thou 
a kingdom that consists in word and truth? then surely thou 
canst be no prejudice to me." Doubtless Pilate took our 
Saviour Christ to be a simple, honest, ignorant man, one per- 
chance come out of a wilderness, a simple fellow, a hermit, 
who knew or understood nothing of the world, or of govern- 
ment. 

XXIII. 

In the writings of St. Paul and St. John is a surpassing 
certainty, knowledge, and plerophoria. They write as if all 
they narrate had been already done before their eyes. 

Christ rightly says of St. Paul, he shall be a chosen in- 
strument and vessel unto me; therefore he was made a 
doctor, and therefore he spake so certainly of the cause. 
Whoso reads Paul may, with a safe conscience, build 
upon his words; for my part, I never read more serious 
writings. 

St. John, in his gospel, describes Christ, that he is a true 
and natural man, a priori^ from former time: " In the be- 
ginning was the word;" and " Whoso honoureth me, thesamo 
honoureth also the Father." But Paul describes Christ, a pos- 



OF god's word. 11 

teriori et effectu, from that which follows, and according to 
the actions or works, as, " They tempted Christ in the wil- 
derness;" " Take heed, therefore, to yourselves," &c. 



The book of Solomon's Proverbs is a fine book, which 
rulers and governors should diligently read, for it contains 
lessons touching God's anger, wherein governors and rulers 
should exercise themselves. 

The author of the book of Ecclesiasticus preaches the law 
well, but he is no prophet. It is not the work of Solomon, 
any more than is the book of Solomon's Proverbs. They are 
both collections made by other people. 

The third book of Esdras I throw into the Elbe ; there are, 
in the fourth, pretty knacks enough; as, " The wine is strong, 
the king is stronger, women strongest of all; but the truth is 
stronger than all these." 

The book of Judith is not a history. It accords not with 
geography. I believe it is a poem, like the legends of the 
saints, composed by some good man, to the end he might 
show how Judith, a personification of the Jews, as God-fear- 
ing people, by whom God is known and confessed, overcame 
and vanquished Holofernes — that is, all the kingdoms of the 
world. 'Tis a figurative work, like that of Homer about 
Troy, and that of Virgil about --Eneas, wherein is shown 
how a great prince ought to be adorned with surpassing va- 
lour, like a brave champion, with wisdom and understanding, 
great courage and alacrity, fortune, honour, and justice. It 
is a tragedy, setting forth what the end of tyrants is. I take 
the book of Tobit to be a comedy concerning women, an ex- 
ample for house-government. I am so great an enemy to 
the second book of the Maccabees, and to Esther, that I wish 
they had not come to us at all, for they have too many hea- 
then unnaturalities. The Jews much more esteemed the 
book of Esther than any of the prophets; though they were 
forbidden to read it before they had attained the age of thirty, 
by reason of the mystic matters it contains. They utterly 
contemn Daniel and Isaiah, those two holy and glorious pro- 
phets, of whom the former, in the clearest manner, preaches 
Christ, while the other describes and portrays the kingdom 



12 Luther's table-talk. 

of Christ, and the monarchies and empires of the world pre- 
ceding it. Jeremiah comes but after them. 

The discourses of the prophets were none of them regu- 
larly committed to writing at the time; their disciples and 
hearers collected them subsequently, one, one piece, another, 
another, and thus was the complete collection formed. 

When Doctor Justus Jonas had translated the book of Tobit, 
he attended Luther therewith, and said: " Many ridiculous 
things are contained in this book, especially about the three 
nights, and the liver of the broiled fish, wherewith the devil 
was scared and driven away." Whereupon Luther said: " 'Tis 
a Jewish conceit; the devil, a fierce and powerful enemy, 
will not be hunted away in such sort, for he has the spear of 
Goliah; but God gives him such weapons, that, when he is 
overcome by the godly, it may be the greater terror and vex- 
ation unto him. Daniel and Isaiah are most excellent pro- 
phets. I am Isaiah — be it spoken with humility — to the ad- 
vancement of God's honour, whose work alone it is, and to 
spite the devil. Philip Melancthon is Jeremiah; that pro- 
phet stood always in fear; even so it is with Melancthon." 

XXV. 

In the book of the Judges, the valiant champions and de- 
liverers are described, who were sent by God, believing and 
trusting wholly in him, according to the first commandment; 
they committed themselves, their actions, and enterprises to 
God, and gave him thanks: they relied only upon the God of 
heaven, and said: Lord God, thou hast done these things, 
and not we; to thee only be the glory. The book of the 
Kings is excellent — a hundred times better than the Chro- 
nicles, which constantly pass over the most important facts, 
without any details whatever. 

The book of Job is admirable; it is not written only touch- 
ing himself, but also for the comfort and consolation of all 
sorrowful, troubled, and perplexed hearts, who resist the 
devil. When he conceived that God began to be angry with 
him, he became impatient, and was much oiFended; it vexed 
and grieved him that the ungodly prospered so well. There- 
fore it should be a comfort to poor Christians that are perse- 
cuted and forced to suffer, that in the life to come, God will 
give unto them exceeding great and glorious benefits, and 
everlastinor wealth and honour. 



OF god's word. 1 3 

XXVI. 

We need not wonder that Moses so briefly described the 
history of the ancient patriarchs, when we see that the Evan- 
gelists, in the shortest measure, describe the sermons in the 
New Testament, running briefly through them, and giving 
but a touch of the preachings of John the Baptist, which, 
doubtless, were the most beautiful. 

XXVII. 

Saint John the Evangelist speak* majestically, yet with 
very plain and simple words; as where he says: " In the be- 
ginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and 
the Word was God. The same was in the beginning with 
God. All things were made by him, and without him was 
not anything made that was made. In him was life, and the 
life was the light of men. And the light shineth in dark- 
ness, and the darkness comprehendeth it not." 

See how he describes God the Creator, and also his crea- 
tures, in plain, clear language, as with a sunbeam. If one 
of our philosophers or high learned men had described them, 
what wonderful swelling and high-trotting words would he 
have paraded, de ente et essentia, so that no man could have 
understood what he meant. 'Tis a great lesson, how mighty 
divine truth is, which presses through, though she be hemmed 
in ever so closely; the more she is read, the more she moves 
and takes possession of the heart. 

XXVIII. 

The psalms of David are of various kinds — didactic, pro- 
phetic, eucharistic, catechetic. Among the prophetic, we 
should particularly distinguish the llOth, Dixit Dominus ; 
and among the didactic, the Miserere Mei, De profundis, and 
Domine, exaudi orationem. The 1 lOth is very fine. It de- 
scribes the kingdom and priesthood of Jesus Christ, and 
declares him to be the King of all things, and the intercessor 
for all men; to whom all things have been remitted by his 
Father, and who has compassion on us all. 'Tis a noble 
psalm; if 1 were well, I would endeavour to make a com- 
mentary on it. 

XXIX. 

Dr. Luther was asked whether the history of the rich man 
and Lazarus was a parable or an actual fact? He replied: The 



14 luthee's table-talk. 

earlier part of the story is evidently historical; the persons, 
the circumstances, the existence of the five brothers, all 
this is given in detail. The reference to Abraham is alle- 
gorical, and highly worthy of observation. We learn from 
it that there are abodes unknown to us, where the souls oi 
men are; secrets into which we must not inquire. No men- 
tion is made of Lazarus' grave; whence we may judge, that 
in God's eyes, the soul occupies far more place than the body. 
Abraham's bosom is the promise and assurance of salvation, 
and the expectation of Jesus Christ; not heaven itself, but 
the expectation of heaven. 

XXX. 

Before the Gospel came among us, men used to undergo 
endless labour and cost, and make dangerous journeys to St. 
James of Compostella, and where not, in order to seek the 
favour of God. But now that God, in his Word, brings his 
favour unto us gratis, confirming it with his sacraments, say- 
ing. Unless ye believe, ye shall surely perish, we will have 
none of it. 

xxxi. 

I have lived to see the greatest plague on earth — the con- 
temning of God's word, a fearful thing, surpassing all other 
plagues in the world; for thereupon most surely follow all 
manner of punishments, eternal and corporal. Did I desire 
for a man all bitter plagues and curses, I would wish him the 
contemning of God's word, for he would then have them all 
at once come upon him, both inward and outward misfor- 
tunes. The contemning of God's word is the forerunner of 
God's punishments; as the examples witness in the times of 
Lot, of Noah, and of our Saviour. 

xxxii. 

Whoso acknowledges that the writings of the Evangelists 
are God's word, with him we are willing to dispute; but 
whoso denies this, with him we will not exchange a word; 
we may not converse with those who reject the first prin- 
ciples, 

XXXIII. 

In all sciences, the ablest professors are they who have 
thoroughly mastered the texts. A man, to be a good juris- 



OF god's -word. 15 

consult, should have every text of the law at his fingers' 
ends; but in our time, the attention is applied rather to 
glosses and commentaries. When I was young, I read the 
Bible over and over and over again, and was so perfectly ac- 
quainted with it, that I could, in an instant, have pointed to 
any verse that might have been mentioned. I then read the 
commentators, but I soon threw them aside, for I found 
therein many things my conscience could not approve, as 
being contrary to the sacred text. 'Tis always better to see 
with one's own eyes than with those of other people. 

XXXIV. 

The words of the Hebrew tongue have a peculiar energy. 
It is impossible to convey so much so briefly in any other 
language. To render them intelligibly, we must not attempt 
to give word for word, but only aim at the sense and idea. 
In translating Moses, I made it my effort to avoid Hebraisms ; 
'twas an arduous business. . The wise ones, who affect 
greater knowledge than myself on the subject, take me to 
task for a word here and there. Did they attempt the labour 
I have accomplished, I would find a hundred blunders in 
them for my one. 

XXXV 

Bullinger said to me, he was earnest against the sectaries, 
as contemners of God's word, and also against those who 
dwelt too much on the literal word, who, he said, sinned 
against God and his almighty power, as the Jews did in 
naming the ark, God. But he who holds a mean between 
both, apprehends the right use of the word and the sacraments. 
To which I answered: '' By this error, you separate the word 
from the spirit; those who preach and teach the word, from 
God who works it, the ministers who baptize, from God who 
commands baptism. You hold that the Holy Ghost is given 
and works without the word, which word, you say, is an 
eternal sign and mark to find the spirit that already possesses 
the heart; so that, according to you, if the word find not the 
spirit, but an ungodly person, then it is not God's word; 
thus defining and fixing the word, not according to God, who 
speaks it, but according as people entertain and receive it. 
You grant that to be God's word, which purifies and 
brings peace and life; but when it works not in the ungodly, 



16 Luther's table talk. 

it is not God's word. You teach that the outward word is 
as an object or picture, signifying and representing some- 
thing ; you measure its use only according to the matter, as 
a human creature speaks for himself; you will not grant that 
God's word is an instrument through which the Holy Ghost 
works and accomplishes his work, and prepares a beginning 
to righteousness or justification. 

" A true Christian must hold for certain that the Word 
which is delivered and preached to the wicked, the dissem- 
blers, and the ungodly, is as much God's Word as that which 
is preached to godly, upright Christians, and that the true 
Christian church is among sinners, Avhere good and bad are 
mingled together. And that the Word, whether it produce 
fruit or no, is, nevertheless, God's strength, which saves all 
that believe therein. Clearly, it will also judge the ungodly, 
(St. John, c. v.) otherwise, these might plead a good excuse 
before God, that they ought not to be condemned, since they 
bad not had God's word, and consequently could not have 
received it. But I teach that the preacher's words, abso- 
lutions, and sacraments, are not his words or works, but 
God's, cleansing, absolving, binding, &c.; we are but the 
instruments or assistants, by whom God works. You say, 
it is the man that preaches, reproves, absolves, comforts, &c., 
though it is God that cleanses the hearts and forgives; but I 
say, God himself preaches, threatens, reproves, affrights, 
comforts, absolves, administers the sacraments, &c. As our 
Saviour Christ says: 'Whoso heareth you, heareth me; and 
what ye loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven,' &c. And 
again: 'It is not you that speak, but the Spirit of your 
Father which speaketh in you.' 

" I am sure and certain, when I go up to the pulpit to preach 
or read, that it is not my word I speak, but that my tongue 
is the pen of a ready writer, as the Psalmist has it. God speaks 
in the prophets and men of God, as St. Peter in his epistle 
says: 'The holy men of God spake as they were moved by 
the Holy Ghost.' Therefore we must not separate or par. 
God and man, according to our natural reason and under- 
standing. In like manner, every hearer must say: I hear 
not St. Paul, St. Peter, or a man speak, but God himself. 

"If I were addicted to God's Word at all times alike, and 
always had such love and desire thereunto as sometimes I 



OF god's -word. 17 

have, tlien sliould I account myself the most blessed man ou 
earth. But the loving apostle, 8t. Paul, failed also herein, 
as he complains, with sighs, saying: 'I see another law in 
my members warring against the law of my mind.' Should 
the Word be false, because it bears not always fruit? The 
search after the Word has been, from the beginning of the 
world, the source of great danger; few people can hit it, 
unless God, through his Holy Spirit, teach it them in their 
hearts." 

Bullinger, having attentively listened to this discourse, 
knelt down, and uttered these words, " O, happy hour that 
brought me to hear this man of God, the chosen vessel 
of the Lord, declaring his truth! I abjure and utterly 
renounce my former errors, thus beaten down by God's 
infallible Word." He then arose and threw his arms around 
Luther's neck, both shedding joyful tears. 

xxxvi. 
Forsheim said that the first of the five books of Moses 
was not written by Moses himself. Dr. Luther replied: 
What matters it, even though Moses did not write it? It is, 
nevertheless, Moses's book, w^herein is exactly related the 
creation of the world. Such futile objections as these should 
not be listened to. 

XXXVII. 

In cases of religion and that concern God's Word, we 
must be sure and certain, without wavering, so that in time 
of trial and temptation their acknowledgment may be distinct, 
and we may not afterwards say, Kon putarem ; a course 
which in temporal matters often involves much danger, but 
in divinity is doubly mischievous. Thus the canonists, the 
popish dissemblers, and other heretics, are right chim.a3ras; in 
the face resembling a fair virgin, the body bemg like a lion, 
and the tail like a snake. Even so is it with their doctrine; 
it glitters, and has a fair aspect, and what they teach is agree- 
able to mortal wisdom and appreciation, and acquires repute. 
Afterwards, lion-like, it breaks through by force, for all 
false teachers commonly make use of the secular arm; but in 
the end, it shows itself a slippery doctrine, having, like Q. 
Bnake, a smooth skin, sliding through the hand. 
Once sure that the doctrine we teach is God's 
c 



IS LUTHER S TABLE-TALK. 

once certain of this, we may build thereupon, and know- 
that this cause shall and must remain; the devil shall not 
be able to overthrow it, much less the world be able to 
uproot it, how fiercely soever it rage. I, God be praised, 
surely know that the doctrine I teach is God's Word, and 
have now hunted from my heart all other doctrines and 
faiths, of what name soever, that do not concur ^vith God's 
word. Thus have I overcome the heavy temptations that 
sometimes tormented me, thus: Art thou, asked the devilish 
thought within, the only man that has God's Word, pure 
and clear, all others failing therein? For thus does Satan 
vex and assault us, under the name and title of God's church; 
what, says he, that doctrine which the Christian church 
has so many years held, and established as right, wilt thou 
presume to reject and overthrow it with thy new doctrine, 
as though it were false and erroneous, thereby producing 
trouble, alteration, and confusion, both in spiritual and tem- 
poral government? 

I find this argument of the devil in all the propliets, whom 
the rulers, both in church and state, have ever upbraided, 
saying: We are God's people, placed and ordained by God 
in an established government; what we settle and acknow- 
ledge as right, that must and shall be observed. What fools 
are ye that presume to teach us, the best and largest part, 
there being of you but a handful? Truly, in this case, we 
must not only be well armed with God's Word and versed 
therein, but must have also certainty of the doctrine, or we 
shall not endure the combat. A man must be able to affirm, 
I know for certain, that what I teach is the only Word of the 
high Majesty of God in heaven, his final conclusion and 
everlasting, unchangeable truth, and whatsoever concurs 
and agrees not w^ith this doctrine, is altogether false, and 
spun by the devil. I have before me God's Word which 
cannot fail, nor can the gates of hell prevail against it; 
thereby will I remain, though the whole world be against 
me. And withal, I have this comfort, that God says: I will 
give thee people and hearers that shall receive it; cast thy 
care upon me; I will defend thee, only remain thou stout 
and steadfast by my Word. 

We must not regard what or how the world esteems us, so 
we have the Word pure, and are certain of our doctrine. 



OF god's "VVORD. 19 

Hence Christ, in John viii. " Which of you convinceth me of 
sin? And if I say the truth, why do you not believe me?" 
All the apostles were most certain of their doctrine; and St. 
Paul, in special manner, insists on the Plerophoria, where he 
says to Timothy: " It is a dear and precious word, that Jesus 
Christ is come into the world to save sinners." The faith 
towards God in Christ must be sure and steadfast, that it 
may solace and make glad the conscience, and put it to rest. 
When a man has this certainty, he has overcome the serpent ; 
but if he be doubtful of the doctrine, it is for him very dan- 
gerous to dispute with the devil. 

XXXVIII. 

A fiery shield is God's Word; of more substance and purer 
than gold, which, tried in the fire, loses nought of its sub- 
stance, but resists and overcomes all the fury of the fiery heat; 
even so, he that believes God's Word overcomes all, and re- 
mains secure everlastingly, against all misfortunes; for this 
shield fears nothing, neither hell nor the devil. 

XXXIX. 

I never thought the world had been so wicked, when the 
Gospel began, as now I see it is; I rather hoped that eve^v 
one would have leaped for joy to have found himself freed 
from the filth of the pope, from his lamentable molestations 
of poor troubled consciences, and that through Christ they 
would by faith obtain the celestial treasure they sought after 
before with such vast cost and labour, though in vain. And 
especially I thought the bishops and universities would with 
joy of heart have received the true doctrines, but I have 
been lamentably deceived. Moses and Jeremiah,' too, com- 
plained they had been deceived. 

XL. 

The thanks the world now gives to the doctrine of the 
gospel, is the same it gave to Christ, namely, the cross; 'tis 
what we must expect. This year is the year of man's in- 
gratitude : the next will be the year of God's chastisement; 
for God must needs chastise, though 'tis against his nature: 
we will have it so. 

c 2 



2C Luther's table-talk. 

XLI. 

Ah, how impious and ungrateful is the world, thus to 
contemn and persecute God's ineffable grace! And we — we 
ourselves — who boast of the gospel, and know it to be God's 
Word, and recognise it for such, yet hold it in no more esteem 
and respect than we do Yirgil or Terence. Truly, I am 
■ less afraid of the pope and his tyrants, than I am of our own 
ingratitude towards the Word of God: 'tis this will place the 
pope in his saddle again. But, first, I hope the day of judg- 
ment will come. 

XLII. 

God has his measuring lines and his canons, called the 
Ten Commandments; they are written in our flesh and blood: 
the sum of them is: " What thou wouldest have done to thy- 
self, the same do thou to another." God presses upon this 
point, saying: " Such measure as thou metest, the same shall 
be measured to thee again." With this measuring line has 
God marked the whole world. They that live and do there- 
after, well it is with them, for God richly rewards them in 
this life. 

XLIIL 

Is it true that God speaks himself with us in the Holy 
Scriptures? thou that doubtest this, must needs think in thy 
heart that God is a har, one that says a thing, and performs 
it not; but thou mayest be sure when he op«ns his mouth, 
it is as much as three worlds. God, with one sole word, 
moulded the whole world. In Psalm xxxiii. it is said: "When 
he speaketh, it is done ; when he commandeth, it standeth 
fast." 

XLIV. 

We must make a great difference between God's Word and 
the word of man. A man's word is a little sound, that flies 
into the air, and soon vanishes; but the Word of God is 
greater than heaven and earth, yea, greater than death and 
hell, for it forms part of the power of God, and endures ever- 
lastingly; we should, therefore, diligently study God^s Word, 
and know and assuredly believe that God himself speaks unto 
us. This was what David saw and believed, w^ho said: " God 
spake in his holiness, thereof I am slad." We should also 



OF god's word. 21 

be glad; but this gladness is oftentimes mixed up witli sorrow 
and pain, of which, again, David is an example, who under- 
went manifold trials and tribulations in connexion with the 
murder and adultery he had committed. It was no honey- 
moon for him, when he was hunted from one place to another, 
to the end he might after remain in God's fear. In the 
second Psalm he says : " Serve the Lord with fear, and 
rejoice with trembling." 

XLV. 

The student of theology has now far greater advantages 
than students ever before had; first, he has the Bible, Avhich 
I have translated from Hebrew into German, so clearly and 
distinctly, that any one may readily comprehend it; next, he 
has Melancthon's Common-place Book (Loci Communes), 
which he should read over and over again, until he has it 
by heart. Once master of these two volumes, he may be re- 
garded as a theologian whom neither devil nor heretic can 
overcome; for he has all divinity at his fingers' ends, and may 
read, understandingly, whatsoever else he pleases. After- 
wards, he may study Melancthon's Commentary on Romans, 
and mine on Deuteronomy and on the Galatians, and practise 
eloquence. 

We possess no work wherein the whole body of theology, 
wherein religion, is more completely summed up, than in 
Melancthon's Common-place Book ; all the Fathers, all the 
compilers of sentences, put together, are not to be compared 
with this book. 'Tis, after the Scriptures, the most perfect 
of works. Melancthon is a better logician than myself; he 
argues better. My superiority lies rather in the rhetorical 
way. If the printers would take my advice, they would print 
those of my books which set forth doctrine, — as my com- 
mentaries on Deuteronomy, on Galatians, and the sermons 
on the four books of St. John. My other writings scarce 
serve better purpose than to mark the progress of the revela- 
tion of the gospel. 

XLVI. 

Christ (Luke viii.) says, " Unto you it is given to know 
the mysteries of the kingdom of God." Here a man might 
ask, What mystery is that? If a mystery, why do ye preach 
it? Whereunto I answer: A mystery is a thing hidden 



22 Luther's table-talk. 

and secret; the mysteries of the kingdom of God are such 
things as lie hidden in the kingdom of God; but he that 
knows Christ aright, knows what God's kingdom is, and what 
therein is to be found. Thej are mysteries, because secret 
and hidden from human sense and reason, when the Holy 
Ghost does not reveal them; for though many hear of them, 
they neither conceive nor understand them. There are now 
many among us who preach of Christ, and hear much spoken 
of him, as that he gave himself to death for us, but this lies 
only upon the tongue, and not in the heart; for they neither 
believe it, nor are sensible of it; as St. Paul says: "The 
natural man perceiveth not the things of the Spirit of God." 
Those on whom the Spirit of God falls, not only hear and 
see it, but also receive it within their hearts and believe, 
and therefore it is no mystery or secret to them. 

XLVIL 

was a special gift of God that speech was given to man- 
kind; for through the Word, and not by force, wisdom 
governs. Through the Word people are taught and com- 
forted, and thereby all sorrow is made light, especially in 
cases of the conscience. Therefore God gave to his church 
an eternal Word to hear, and the sacraments to use. But 
this holy function of preaching the Word is, by Satan, fiercely 
resisted; he would willingly have it utterly suppressed, for 
thereby his kingdom is destroyed. 

Truly speech has wonderful strength and power, that 
through a mere word, proceeding out of the mouth of a poor 
human creature, the devil, that so proud and powerful spirit, 
should be driven away, shamed and confounded. 

The sectaries are so impudent, that they dare to reject 
the word of the mouth; and to smooth their damnable opi- 
nions, say: No external thing makes one to be saved; the 
word of the mouth and the sacraments are external things: 
therefore they make us not to be saved. But I answer: We 
must discriminate wholly between the external things of God 
and the outward things of man. The external things of God 
are powerful and saving; it is not so with the outward things 
of man. 

XLVIIL 

God alone, through his word, instructs the heart, so that 
it may come to the serious knowledge how wicked it is, and 



OF god's word. 23 

corrupt and hostile to God. Afterwards God brings man 
to the knowledge of God, and how he may be freed from 
sin, and how, after this miserable, evanescent world, he may 
obtain life everlasting. Human reason, with all its wisdom, 
can bring it no further than to instruct people how to live 
honestly and decently in the world, how to keep house, build, 
&c., things learned from philosophy and heathenish books. 
But how they should learn to know God and his dear Son, 
Christ Jesus, and to be saved, this the Holy Ghost alone 
teaches through God's word; for philosophy understands 
nought of divine matters. I don't say that men may not 
teach and learn philosophy; I approve thereof, so that it be 
within reason and moderation. Let philosophy remain within 
her bounds, as God has appointed, and let us make use of 
her as of a character in a comedy; but to mix her up with 
divinity may not be endured; nor is it tolerable to make 
faith an accidens or quality, happening by chance; for such 
words are merely philosophical, — used in schools and in tem- 
poral affairs, which human sense and reason may compre- 
hend. But faith is a thing in the heart, having its being 
and substance by itself, given of God as his proper work, not 
a corporal thing, that may be seen, felt, or touched. 

XLIX. 

"We must know how to teach God's word aright, discern- 
ingly, for there are divers sorts of hearers; some are struck 
with fear in the conscience, are perplexed, and awed by their 
sins, and, in apprehension of God's anger, are penitent; these 
must be comforted with the consolations of the gospel. 
Others are hardened, obstinate, stiif-necked, rebel-hearted; 
these must be affrighted by the law, by examples of God's 
wrath: as the fires of Elijah, the deluge, the destruction of 
Sodom and Gomorrah, the downfal of Jerusalem. These 
hard heads need sound knocks. 

L. 

The gospel of the remission ot sins through faith in 
Christ, is received of few people; most men little regard the 
sweet and comfortable tidings of the gospel; some hear it, 
but only even so as they hear mass in popedom; the majority 
attend God's word out of custom, and, when they have done 
that, think all is well. The case is, the sick, needing a 
physician, welcome him; but he that is well, cares not for 



24 Luther's table-talk. 

him, as we see by the Canaanitish woman in Matthew xv., 
who felt her own and her daughter's necessities, and there- 
fore ran after Christ, and in nowise would suffer herself to 
be denied or sent away from him. In like manner, Moses 
was fain to go before, and learn to feel sins, that so grace 
might taste the sweeter. Therefore, it is but labour lost 
(how familiar and loving soever Christ be figured unto us), 
except we first be humbled through the acknowledgment of 
our sins, and so yearn after Christ, as the Magnificat says: 
" He filled the hungry with good things, and the rich he 
hath sent empty away," words spoken for the comfort of all, 
and for instruction of miserable, poor, needful sinners, and 
contemned people, to the end that in all their deepest sorrows 
and necessities they may know with whom to take refuge 
and seek aid and consolation. 

But we must take fast hold on God's Word, and believe all 
true which that says of God, though God and all his creatures 
should seem unto us other than as the Word speaks, as we 
see the Canaanitish woman did. The Word is sure, and fails 
not, though heaven and earth must pass away. Yet, oh! 
how hard is this to natural sense and reason, that it must 
strip itself naked, and abandon all it comprehends and feels, 
depending only upon the bare Word. The Lord of his 
mercy help us with faith in our necessities, and at our last 
end, when we strive with death. 

LI. 

(Heaven and earth, all the emperors, kings, and princes of 
the world, could not raise a fit dwelling-place for God; yet, 
in a Aveak human soul, that keeps his Word, he willingly 
resides. Isaiah calls heaven the Lord's seat, and earth his 
footstool; he does not call them his dwelling-place; when 
we seek after God, we shall find him with them that keep 
his Word. Christ says: " If a man love me, he will keep my 
words, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto 
him, and make our abode with him." Nothing could be 
simpler or clearer than these words of the Saviour, and yet 
he confounds herewith all the wisdom of the worldly-wise. He 
sought to speak non in suhlimi sed humili genere. If I had 
to teach a child, I would teach him in the same way. 



OF god's wokd. 25 

LII. • 

Great is the strength of the divine Word. In the epistle 
to the Hebrews, it is called " a two-edged sword." But we 
Aave neglected and contemned the pure and clear Word, and 
have drunk not of the fresh and cool spring; we are gone 
from the clear fountain to the foul puddle, and drunk its 
filthy water; that is, we have sedulously read old writers and 
teachers, who went about with speculative reasonings, like 
the monks and friars. 

The words of our Saviour Christ are exceeding powerful; 
they have hands and feet; they outdo the utmost subtleties 
of the worldly-wise, as we see in the gospel, where Christ 
confounds the wisdom of the Pharisees with plain and simple 
words, so that they knew not which way to turn and wind 
themselves. It was a sharp syllogism of his : " Give unto 
Coesar the things which are Cossar's;" wherewith he neither 
commanded nor prohibited, but snared them in their own 
casuistry. 

LIII. 

Where God's Word is taught pure and unf\ilsified, there is 
also poverty, as Christ says: " I am sent to preach the Gospel 
to the poor." More than enough has been given to unprofit- 
able, lazy, ungodly people in monasteries and cells, who lead 
us into danger of body and soul; but not one farthing is given, 
willingly, to a Christian teacher. Superstition, idolatry, and 
hypocrisy, have ample wages, but truth goes a begging. 

LIV. 

When God preaches his word, then presently follows 'the 
cross to godly Christians; as St. Paul testifies: "All that 
will live a godly life in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution," 
And our Saviour: " The disciple is not greater than the 
master: have they persecuted me? they will persecute you 
also." The work rightly expounds and declares the Word, 
as the prophet Isaiah: Grief and sorrow teach how to mark 
the Word. No man understands the Scriptures, unless he be 
acquainted with the cross. 

LV. 

In the time of Christ and the apostles, God's Word was a 
word of doctrine, which was preached everywhere in the 



26 LUTHER S TABLE-TALK. 

world; afterwards in popedom it was a word of reading, 
which they only read, but understood not. In this our time, 
it is made a word of strife, which fights and strives; it will 
endure its enemies no longer, but remove them out of the 
way. 

LVI. 

Like as in the world a child is an heir only because it is 
born to inherit, even so, faith only makes such to be God's 
children as are born of the Word, which is the womb wherein 
we are conceived, born, and nourished, as the prophet Isaiah 
says. Now, as through such a birth we become God's 
children, (wrought by God without our help or doing,) even 
so, we are also heirs, and being heirs, are freed from sin, 
death, and the devil, and shall inherit everlasting life. 

LVIL 

I admonish every pious Christian that he take not offence 
at the plain, unvarnished manner of speech of the Bible. 
Let him reflect that what may seem trivial and vulgar to him, 
emanates from the high majesty, power, and wisdom of God. 
The Bible is the book that makes fools of the wise of this 
world; it is understood only of the plain and simple hearted. 
Esteem this book as the precious fountain that can never be 
exhausted. In it thou findest the swaddling-clothes and the 
manger whither the angels directed the poor, simple shep- 
herds; they seem poor and mean, but dear and precious is 
the treasure that lies therein. 

LVIII. 

The ungodly papists prefer the authority of the church far 
above God's Word; a blasphemy abominable and not to be 
endured; wherewith, void of all shame and piety, they spit in 
God's face. Truly, God's patience is exceeding great, in 
that they be not destroyed; but so it always has been. 

LIX. 

In times past, as in part of our own, 'twas dangerous 
work to study, when divinity and all good arts were con- 
temned, and fine, expert, and prompt wits were plagued with 
sophistry. Aristotle, the heathen, was held in such repute 
and honour, that whoso undervalued or contradicted him. 



OF god's word. 27 

was held, at Cologne, for an heretic; whereas they them- 
selves understood not Aristotle. 

LX. 

In the apostles' time, and in our own, the gospel was and 
is preached more powerfully and spread further than it was 
in the time of Christ; for Christ had not such repute, nor so 
many hearers as the apostles had, and as now we have. 
Christ himself says to his disciples: Ye shall do greater 
works than I; I am but a little grain of mustard-seed; but 
ye shall be like the vine-tree, and as the arms and boughs 
wherein the birds shall build their nests. 



All men now presume to criticise the gospel. Almost 
every old doting fool or prating sophist must, forsooth, be a 
doctor in divinity. All other arts and sciences have masters, 
of whom people must learn, and rules and regulations which 
must be observed and obeyed; the Holy Scripture only, 
God's word, must be subject to each man's pride and pre- 
sumption; hence, so many sects, seducers, and offences. 

LXII. 

I did not learn my divinity at once, but was constrained 
by my temptations to search deeper and deeper; for no man, 
without trials and temptations, can attain a true understand- 
ing of the Holy Scriptures. St. Paul had a devil that beat 
him with fists, and with temptations drove him diligently to 
study the Holy Scripture. I had hanging on my neck the 
pope, the universities, all the deep-learned, and the devil; 
these hunted me into the Bible, wherein I sedulously read, 
and thereby, God be praised, at length attained a true under- 
standing of it. Without such a devil, we are but only spe- 
culators of divinity, and according to our vain reasoning, 
dream that so and so it must be, as the monks and friars in 
monasteries do. The Holy Scripture of itself is certain and 
true: God grant me grace to catch hold of its just use. 



28 i.ttther's table-talk. 



OF GOD'S WOBKa 



LXIII. 

All the works of God are unsearchable and unspeakable, 
no human sense can find them out; faith only takes hold of 
them without human power or aid. No mortal creature can 
comprehend God in his majesty, and therefore did he come 
before us in the simplest manner, and was made man, ay, 
sin, death, and weakness. 

In all things, in the least creatures, and in their members, 
God's almighty power and wonderful works clearly shine. 
For what man, how powerful, wise, and holy soever, can 
make out of one fig a fig-tree, or another fig? or, out of one 
cherry-stone, a cherry, or a cherry-tree? or what man can 
know how God creates and preserves all things, and makes 
them grow. 

Neither can we conceive how the eye sees, or how in- 
telligible words are spoken plainly, when only the tongue 
moves and stirs in the mouth; all which are natural things, 
daily seen and acted. How then should we be able to com- 
prehend or understand the secret counsels of God's majesty, 
or search them out with our human sense, reason, or under- 
standing. Should we then admire our own wisdom? I, for 
my part, admit myself a fool, and yield myself captive. 

LXIV. 

In the beginning, God made Adam out of a piece of clay, 
and Eve out of Adam's rib: he blessed them, and said; " Be 
fruitful and increase" — words that will stand and remain 
powerful to the world's end. Though many people die daily 
yet others are ever being born, as David says in his psalm: 
" Thou sufferest men to die and go away like a shadow, and 
sayest, Come again ye children of men." These and other 
things which he daily creates, the ungodly blind world see 



OF GOD S WORKS. 29 

not, nor acknowledge for God's wonders, but think all is 
done by chance and haphazard, whereas, the godly, where- 
soever they cast their eyes, beiiolding heaven and earth, the 
air and water, see and acknowledge all for God's wonders; 
and. full of astonishment and delight, laud the Creator, 
knowing that God is well pleased therewith/ 

LXV. 

For the blind children of the world the articles of faith 
are too high. That three persons are one only God; that 
the true Son of God was made man; that in Christ are two 
natures, divine and human, &c., all this offends them, as 
fiction and fable. For just as unlikely as it is to say, a 
man and a stone are one person, so it is unlikely to human 
sense and reason that God was made man, or that divine 
and human natures, united in Christ, are one person. St. Paul 
showed his understanding of this matter, though he took not 
hold of all, in Colossians: " In Christ dwelleth all the fulness 
of the Godhead bodily." Also: " In him lies hid all treasure 
of wisdom and knowledge." 

LXVI. 

If a man ask, Why God permits that men be hardened, 
and fall into everlasting perdition? let him ask again: Why 
God did not spare his only Son, but gave him for us all, to 
die the ignominious death of the cross, a more certain sign 
of his love towards us poor people, than of his wrath against 
us. Such questions cannot be better solved and answ^ered 
than by converse questions. True, the malicious devil 
deceived and seduced Adam; but we ought to consider 
that, soon after the fall, Adam received the promise of the 
woman's seed that should crush the serpent's head, and 
should bless the people on earth. Therefore, we must ac- 
knowledge that the goodness and mercy of the Father, who 
sent his Son to be our Saviour, is immeasurably great to- 
wards the wicked ungovernable world. Let, therefore, his 
good will be acceptable unto thee, oh, man, and speculate 
not with thy devilish queries, thy whys and thy wherefores, 
touching God's words and works. For God, who is creator 
of all creatures, and orders all things according to his 



30 LUTHER'S T^BLE-TALK. 

unsearchable will and wisdom, is not pleased with such ques- 
tionings. 

Why God sometimes, out of his divine counsels, wonder- 
fully wise, unsearchable to human reason and understanding, 
has mercy on this man, and hardens that, it beseems not us 
to inquire. We should know, undoubtingly, that he does 
nothing without certain cause and counsel. Truly, if God 
were to give an account to every one of his works and 
actions, he were but a poor, simple God. 

Our Saviour said to Peter, " What I do thou knowest 
not now, but thou shalt know hereafter." Hereafter, then, 
we shall know how graciously our loving God and Father 
has been affected unto us. In the meantime, though misfor- 
tune, misery, and trouble be upon us, we must have this sure 
confidence in him, that he will not suffer us to be destroyed 
either in body or soul, but will so deal with us, that all 
things, be they good or evil, shall redound to our advantage. 

LXVII. 

When one asked, where God was before heaven was 
created? St. Au^ustin answered: He was in himself. When 
another asked me the same question, I said: He was building 
hell for such idle, presumptuous, fluttering and inquisitive 
spirits as you. After he had created all things, he was 
everywhere, and yet he was nowhere, for I cannot take hold 
of him without the Word. But he will be found there 
where he has engaged to be. The Jews found him at Jeru- 
salem by the throne of grace, (Exod. xxv.) We find him in 
the Word and faith, in baptism and the sacraments; but in 
his majesty, he is nowhere to be found. 

It was a special grace when God bound himself to a certain 
place where he would be found, namely, in that place where 
the tabernacle was, towards which they prayed; as first, in 
Shilo and Sichem, afterwards at Gibeon, and lastly at Jeru- 
salem, in the temple. 

The Greeks and heathens in after times imitated this, and 
built temples for their idols in certain places, as at Ephesus 
for Diana, at Delphos for Apollo, &c. For, where God 
built a church there the devil would also build a chapel. 
They imitated the Jews also in this, namely, that as the 
Most Holiest was dark, and had no light, even so and after 



OF GOD S WORKS. 31 

the same manner, did they make their shrines dark -where 
the devil made answer. Thus is the devil ever God's ape. 

LXVIII. 

God is upright, faithful, and true, as he has shown, not 
only in his promises, through Christ, of forgiveness of sins, 
and deliverance from everlasting death, but also, in that he 
has laid before us, in the Scriptures, many gracious and 
comforting examples of great and holy saints, who of God 
were highly enlightened and favoured, and who, notwith- 
standing, fell into great and heavy sins. 

Adam, by his disobedience, hereditarily conveyed sin and 
death upon all his posterity. Aaron brought a great sin 
upon Israel, insomuch that God would have destroyed her. 
David also fell very heavily. Job and Jeremiah cursed the 
day wherein they were born. Jonas was sorely vexed, 
because Nineveh was not destroyed. Peter denied, Paul 
persecuted Christ. 

These and such like innumerable examples does Holy 
Writ relate to us; not that we should live securely, and sin, 
relying upon the mercy of God, but that, when we feel his 
anger, " which will surely follow upon the sins," we should 
not despair, but remember these comfortable examples, and 
thence conclude, that, as God was merciful unto them, so 
likewise he wdll be gracious unto us, out of his mere goodness 
and mercy shown in Christ, and will not impute our sins 
unto us. 

We may also see by such examples of great holy men 
falling so grievously, what a wicked, crafty, and envious 
spirit the devil is, a very prince and god of the world. 

These high, divine people, who committed such heavy 
sins, fell, through God's counsel and permission, to the end 
they should not be proud or boast themselves of their gifts 
and qualities, but should rather fear. For, when David had 
slain Uriah, had taken from him his wife, and thereby given 
cause to God's enemies to blaspheme, he could not boast he 
had governed well, or shown goodness; but he said: "I have 
sinned against the Lord," and with tears prayed for mercy. 
Job also acknowledgingly says: "I have spoken foolishly, 
and therefore do I accuse myself, and repent." 



32 Luther's table-talk. 



LXIX. 



When God contemplates some great work, he begins it by 
the hand of some poor, weak, human creature, to whom he 
afterwards gives aid, so that the enemies who seek to obstruct 
it, are overcome. As when he delivered the children of 
Israel out of the long, w^earisome, and heavy captivity in 
Egypt, and led them into the land of promise, he called 
Moses, to whom he afterwards gave his brother Aaron as an 
assistant. And though Pharaoh at first set himself hard 
against them, and plagued the people worse than before, yet 
he was forced in the end to let Israel go. And when he 
hunted after them with all his host, the Lord drowned 
Pharaoh with all his power in the Red Sea, and so delivered 
his people. 

Again, in the time of Eli the priest, when matters stood 
very evil in Israel, the Philistines pressing hard upon them, 
and taking away the Ark of God into their land, and when 
Eli, in great sorrow of heart, fell backwards from his chair 
and broke his neck, and it seemed as if Israel were utterly 
undone, God raised up Samuel the prophet, and through 
him restored Israel, and the Philistines were overthrown. 

Afterwards, when Saul was sore pressed by the Philistines, 
so that for anguish of heart he despaired and thrust himself 
through, three of his sons and many people dying with him, 
every man thought that now there was an end of Israel. 
But shortly after, w4ien David was chosen king over all 
Israel, then came the golden time. For David, the chosen 
of God, not only saved Israel out of the enemies'' hands, but 
also forced to obedience all kings and people that set them- 
selves against him, and helped the kingdom up again in such 
manner, that in his and Solomon's time it was in full 
flourish, power, and glory. 

Even so, when Judah was carried captive to Babylon, then 
God selected the prophets Ezekiel, Haggai, and Zachariah, 
who comforted men in their distress and captivity; making 
not only promise of their return into the land of Judah, but 
also that Christ should come in his due time. 

Hence we may see that God never forsakes his people., 
uor even the wicked; though, by reason of their sins, he 
suffer them a long time to be severely punished and plagued. 



OF GODS WORKS. S3 

As also, in this our time, he has graciously delivered us from 
the long, wearisome, heavy, and horrible captivity of the 
wicked pope. God of his mercy grant we may thankfully 
acknowledge this. 

LXX. 

God could be rich readily enough, if he were more provident, 
and denied us the use of his creatures; let him, for ever so 
short a while, keep back the sun, so that it shine not, or lock 
up air, w^ater, or fire, ah! how willingly would we give all 
our wealth to have the use of these creatures again. 

But seeing God so liberally heaps his gifts upon us, we 
claim them as of right; let him deny them if he dare. The 
unspeakable multitude of his benefits obscures the faith of 
believers, and much more so, that of the ungodly. 

LXXI. 

i^When God wills to punish a people or a kingdom, he takes 
away from it the good and godly teachers and preachers, 
and bereaves it of wise, godly, and honest rulers and 
counsellors, and of brave, upright, and experienced soldiers, 
and of other good men. Then are the common people 
secure and merry; they go on in all wilfulness, they care no 
longer for the truth and for the divine doctrine; nay, they de- 
spise it, and fall into blindness; they have no fear or honesty; 
they give way to all manner of shameful sins, whence arises a 
wild, dissolute, and devilish kind of living, as that we now, 
alas! see and are too well cognizant of, and which cannot long 
endure. I fear the axe is laid to the root of the tree, soon 
to cut it down. God of his infinite mercy take us graciously 
away, that we may not be present at such calamities. 

LXXII. 

God gives us sun and moon and stars, fire and water, air 
and earth, all creatures, body and soul, all manner of main- 
tenance, fruits, grain, corn, wine, whatever is good for the 
preservation and comfort of this temporal life; moreover he 
gives unto us his all-saving Word, yea, himself. 

Yet what gets he thereby? Truly, nothing, but that he is 
wickedly blasphemed, and that his only Son is contemned 



S4 Luther's table-talk. 

and crucified, his servants plagued, banished, persecuted, and 
slain. Such a godly child is the world; woe be to it. 

LXXIII. 

God very wonderfully entrusts his highest office to 
preachers that are themselves poor sinners who, while teach- 
ing it, very weakly follow it. Thus goes it ever with God's 
power in our weakness; for when he is weakest iu us, then 
is he strongest. 

LXXIV. 

How should God deal with us? Good days we cannot 
bear, evil we cannot endure. Gives he riches unto us? then 
are we proud, so that no man can live by us in peace; nay, 
we will be carried upon heads and shoulders, and will be 
adored as gods. Gives he poverty unto us? then are we 
dismayed, impatient, and murmur against him. Therefore, 
nothing were better for us, than forthwith to be covered over 
with the shovel. 

LXXV. 

Since God, said some one, knew that man would not 
continue in the state of innocence, why did he create him at 
all? Dr. Luther laughed, and replied: The Lord, all- 
powerful and magnificent, saw that he should need in his 
house, sewers and cess-pools; be assured he knows quite well 
Avliat he is about. Let us keep clear of these abstract ques- 
tions, and consider the will of God such as it has been 
revealed unto us. 

LXXVI. 

Dr. Henning asked: "Is reason to hold no authority at all 
with Christians, since it is to be set aside in matters of faith?" 
The Doctor replied: Before faith and the knowledge of God, 
reason i?> mere darkne^s.s; but in the hands of those who 
believe, 'tis an excellent instrument. All faculties and gifts 
are pernicious, exercised by the impious; but most salutary 
when possessed by godly persons. 

LXXVII. 

God deals strangely with his saints, contrary to all human 
wisdom and understanding, to the end, that those who fear 
Grod and are good Christians, may ^earn to depend on invi- 



or god's works. 35 

sible things, and through mortification may be made alive 
again ; for God's AYord is a light that shines in a dark place, 
as all examples of faith show. Esau was accursed, yet it 
went well with him; he was lord in the land, and priest in 
tlie church ; but Jacob had to fly, and dwell in poverty in 
another country. 

God deals with godly Christians much as with the ungodly, 
yea, and sometimes far worse. He deals with them even as 
a house-father with a son and a servant; he whips and beats 
the son much more and oftener than the servant, yet, never- 
theless, he gathers for the son a treasure to inherit, while a 
stubborn and a disobedient servant he beats not with the rod, 
but thrusts out of doors, and gives him nothing of the in- 
heritance. 

LXXVIII. 

God is a good and gracious Lord; he will be held for God 
only and alone, according to the first commandment : " Thou 
shalt have none other Gods but me." He desires nothing of 
us, no taxes, subsidies, money, or goods; he only requires 
that he may be our God and Father, and therefore he bestows 
upon us, richly, with an overflowing cup, all manner of spi- 
ritual and temporal gifts; but we look not so much as once 
towards him, nor will have him to be our God. 

LXXIX. 

God is not an angry God; if he were so we were all utterly 
lost and undone. God does not willingly strike mankind, ex- 
cept, as a just God, he be constrained thereunto; but, having 
no pleasure in unrighteousness and ungodliness, he must 
therefore suffer the punishment to go on. As 1 sometimes 
look through the fingers, when the tutor whips my son John, 
so it is with God; when we are unthankful and disobedient 
to his word and commandments, he suffers us, through the 
devil, to be soundly lashed with pestilence, famine, and such 
like whips; not that he is our enemy, and to destroy us, but 
that through such scourging, he may call us to repentance and 
amendment, and so allure us to seek him, run to him, and 
call upon him for help. Of this we have a fine example in the 
book of Judges, where the angel, in God's person, speaks 
thus: " I have stricken you so often, and ye are nothing the 
better for it;" and the people of Israel said: " Save thou us 

d2 



36 ltjther's table-talk. 

but now; we have sinned and done amiss: punish thou us, 
Lord, and do with us what thou wilt, only save us now," &c. 
Whereupon he struck not all the people to death. In like 
manner did David, when he had sinned, (in causing the people 
to be numbered, for wiiich God punished the people with pes- 
tilence, so that 70,000 died) humble himself, saying: " Behold, 
Lord, I have sinned, I have done this misdeed, and have 
deserved this punishment: What have these sheep done? Let 
thy hand be upon me, and upon my father's house," &c. 
Then the lord " repented him of the evil, and said to the 
angel that destroyed the people, It is enough, stay thy hand." 

He that can humble himself earnestly before God in Christ, 
has already won; otherwise, the Lord God would lose his 
deity, whose own work it is, that he have mercy on the poor 
and sorrowful, and spare them that humble themselves before 
him. Were it not so, no human creature would come unto 
him, or call upon him; no man would be heard, no man saved, 
nor thank him; " For in hell no man praiseth thee," says the 
Psalm. The devil can affright, murder, and steal; but God 
revives and comforts. 

This little word, God, is, in the Scripture, a word with 
manifold significations, and is oftentimes understood of a thing 
after the nature of its operation and essence: as the devil is 
called a god; namely, a god of sin, of death, of despair, and 
damnation. 

We must make due difference between this god and the 
upright and true God, w^ho is a God of Hfe, comfort, salvation, 
justification, and all goodness; for there are many words that 
bear no certain meanings, and equivocation is always the 
mother of error. 

LXXX. 

The wicked and ungodly enjoy the most part of God's 
creatures; the tyrants have the greatest power, lands, and 
people; the usurers the money; the farmers eggs, butter, 
corn, barley, oats, apples, pears, &c.; while godly Christians 
must suffer, be persecuted, sit in dungeons, where they can 
see neither sun nor moon, be thrust out into poverty, be 
banished, plagued, &c. But things will be better one day; 
they cannot always remain as now ; let us have patience, and 
steadfastly remain by the pure doctrine, and not fall away 
from it, notwithstanding all this misery. 



OF god's works. 37 



Our Lord God and the devil have two modes of policy 
which agree not together, but are quite opposite the one to 
the other. ' God at the first affrights, and afterwards lifts up 
and comforts again; so that the flesh and the old man should 
be killed, and the spirit, or new man, live. Whereas the devil 
makes, at first, people secure and bold, that they, void of 
all fear, may commit sin and wickedness, and not only remain 
in sin, but take delight and pleasure therein, and think they 
have done all well; but at last, when Mr. Stretch-leg comes, 
then he affrights and scares them without measure, so that 
they either die of great grief, or else, in the end, are left with- 
out all comfort, and despair of God's grace and mercy. 

LXXXII. 

God only, and not wealth, maintains the world; riches ! 
merely make people proud and lazy. At Venice, where the' 
richest people are, a horrible dearth fell among them in our 
time, so that they were driven to call upon the Turks for 
help, who sent twenty-four galleys laden with corn; all which, 
well nigh in port, sunk before their eyes. Great wealth and 
money cannot still hunger, but rather occasion more dearth; 
for where rich people are, there things are always dear. More- 
over, money makes no man right merry, but much rather 
pensive and full of sorrow; for riches, says Christ, are thorns 
that prick people. Yet is the world so mad that it sets 
therein all its joy and felicity. 

LXXXIII. 

There is no greater anger than when God is silent, and 
talks not with us, but suffers us to go on in our sinful works, 
and to do all things according to our own passions and plea- 
sure; as it has been with the Jews for the last fifteen hun- 
dred years. 

Ah, God, punish, we pray thee, with pestilence and famine, 
and with what evil and sickness may be else on earth; but be 
not silent, Lord, towards us. God said to the Jews: " I have 
stretched forth mine hand, and have cried, come hither and 
hear," &c. " But ye said. We will not hear." 

Even so likewise do we now; we are weary of God's word; 
we will not have upright, good, and godly preachers and 



38 Luther's table-talk. 

teachers that threaten us, and bring God's word pure and 
unfalsified before us, and condemn false doctrine, and truly 
warn us. No, such cannot we endure; we will not hear them, 
nay, we persecute and banish them; therefore will God also 
punish us. Thus it goes with wicked and lost children, that 
will not hearken to their parents, nor be obedient unto them; 
they will afterwards be rejected of them again. 

LXXXIV. 

Nothing displeases Almighty God more than when we de- 
-f fend and cloak our sins, and will not acknowledge that we 
have done wrong, as did Saul; for the sins that be not ac- 
knowledged, are against the first table of the Ten Command- 
ments. Saul sinned against the first table, David against the 
second. Those are sinners against the second table, that 
look on the sermon of Repentance, suffer themselves to be 
threatened and reproved, acknowledge their sins, and better 
themselves. Those that sin against the first table, as idola- 
ters, unbelievers, contemners, and blasphemers of God, 
falsifiers of God's word, &c. attribute to themselves wisdom 
and power; they will be wise and mighty, both which quali- 
ties God reserves to himself as peculiarly his own. 

LXXXV. 

'Tis inexpressible how ungodly and wicked the world is. 
We may easily perceive it from this, that God has not only 
suffered punishments to increase, but also has appointed so 
many executioners and hangmen to punish his subjects; as 
evil spirits, tyrants, disobedient children, knaves, and wicked 
women, wild beasts, vermin, sickness, &c.; yet all this can 
make «s neither bend nor bow. 

Better it were that God should be angry with us, than that 
we be angry with God, for he can soon be at an union 
with us again, because he is merciful; but when we are angry 
with him, then the case is not to be helped. 

LXXXVI. 

God could be exceeding rich in temporal wealth, if he so 
pleased, but he will not. If he would but come to the pope, 
the emperor, a king, a prince, a bishop, a rich merchant, a 
citizen, a farmer, and say: Unless you give me a hundred 



OF cod's works. 39 

thousand crowns, you shall die on the spot; every one would 
say: I will give it, with all my heart, if I may but live. But 
now we are such unthankful slovens, that we give him not so 
much as a Deo gratias, though we receive of him, to rich 
overflowing, such great benefits, merely out of his goodness 
and mercy. Is not this a shame? Yet, notwithstanding 
such unthankfulness, our Lord God and merciful Father suf- 
fers not himself to be scared away, but continually shows us 
all manner of goodness. If in his gifts and benefits he were 
more sparing and close-handed, we should learn to be thankful. 
If he caused every human creature to be born but with one 
leg or foot, and seven years afterwards gave him the other; or 
in the fourteenth year gave one hand, and afterwards, in the 
twentieth year, the other, then we should better acknowledge 
God's gifts and benefits, and value them at a higher rate, and 
be thankful. He has given unto us a whole sea-full of his 
Word, all manner of languages and liberal arts. We buy at 
this time, cheaply, all manner of good books. He gives us 
learned people, that teach well and regularly, so that a youth, 
if he be not altogether a dunce, may learn more in one year 
now, than formerly in many years. Arts are now so cheap, 
that almost they go about begging for bread; woe be to us 
that we are so lazy, improvident, negligent, and unthankful. 

LXXXVII. 

We are nothing worth with all our gifts and qualities, how 
great soever they be, unless God continually hold his hand 
over us: if he forsake us, then are our wisdom, art, sense, 
and understanding futile. If he do not constantly aid us, 
then our highest knowledge and experience in divinity, or 
what else we attain unto, will nothing serve; for when the 
hour of trial and temptation comes, we shall be despatched in 
a moment, the devil, through his craft and subtilty, tearing 
away from us even those texts in Holy Scripture wherewith 
we should comfort ourselves, and setting before our eyes, in- 
stead, only sentences of fearful threatening. 

Wherefore, let no man proudly boast and brag of his own 
righteousness, wisdom, or other gifts and qualities, but humble 
himself, and pray with the holy apostles, and say: Ah, Lord! 
strengthen and increase the faith in us! 



40 LUTHER S TABLE-TALK. 

LXXXVIII. 

The greater God's gifts and works, the less are they re- 
garded. The highest and most precious treasure we receive 
of God is, that we can speak, hear, see, &c. ; but how few 
acknowledge these as God's special gifts, much less give God 
thanks for them. The world highly esteems riches, honour, 
power, and other things of less value, which soon vanish 
away, but a blind man, if in his right wits, would willingly ex- 
change all these for sight. The reason why the corporal gifts 
of God are so much undervalued is, that they are so common, 
that God bestows them also upon brute beasts, which as well 
as we, and better, hear and see. Nay, when Christ made the 
blind to see, drove out devils, raised the dead, &c., he was 
upbraided by the ungodly hypocrites, who gave themselves 
out for God's people, and was told that he was a Samaritan, 
and had a devil. Ah! the world is the devil's, whether it 
goes or stands still; how, then, can men acknowledge God's 
gifts and benefits? It is with us as with young children, 
who regard not so much their daily bread, as an apple, a pear, 
or other toys. Look at the cattle going into the fields to pas- 
ture, and behold in them our preachers, our milk-bearers, 
butter-bearers, cheese and wool bearers, which daily preach 
\mto us faith in God, and that we should trust in him, as in 
our loving Father, who cares for us, and will maintain and 
nourish us. 

LXXXIX. 

No man can estimate the great charge God is at only in 
maintaining birds and such creatures, comparatively nothing 
worth. I am persuaded that it costs him, yearly, more to 
maintain only the sparrows, than the revenue of the French 
king amounts to. What, then, shall we say of all the rest of 
his creatures? 

xc. 

God delights in our temptations, and yet hates them; he 
delights in them when they drive us to prayer: he hates 
them when they drive us to despair. The Psalm says: An 
humble and contrite heart is an acceptable sacrifice to God, 
&c. Therefore, when it goes well with you, sing and praise 
God with a hymn : goes it evil, that is, does temptation come, 
then pray: "For the Lord has pleasure in those that fear 



OF god's works. 41 

him;" and that which follows is better: "and in them that 
hope in his goodness:" for God helps the lowly and humble, 
seeing he says: " Thinkest thou my hand is shortened, that 
I cannot help?" He that feels himself weak in faith, let him 
always have a desire to be strong therein, for that is a nourish- 
ment which God relishes in us. 

' xci. 
God, in this world, has scarce tne tenth part of the people; 
the smallest number only will be saved. The world is ex- 
ceeding ungodly and wicked; who would believe our people 
should be so unthankful towards the gospel? 

XCII. 

'Tis wonderful how God has put such excellent physic in 
mere muck; we know by experience that swine's dung stints 
the blood; horse's serves for the pleurisy; man's heals wounds 
and black blotches; asses' is used for the bloody flux, and 
cow's, with preserved roses, serves for epilepsy, or for con- 
vulsions of children. 

XCIII. 

God seems as though he had dealt inconsiderately in com- 
manding the world to be governed by the Word of Truth, 
especially since he has clothed and hooded it with a poor, 
weak and contemned Word of the Cross. For, the world will 
not have the truth, but lies; neither willingly do they aught 
that is upright and good, unless compelled thereto by main 
force. The world has a loathing of the cross, and will rather 
follow the pleasures of the devil, and have pleasant days, than 
carry the cross of our blessed Saviour Christ Jesus. He that 
best governs the world, as most worthy of it, is Satan, by his 
lieutenant the pope; he can please thew^orld well, and knows 
how to make it give ear unto him; for his kingdom has a 
mighty show and repute, which is acceptable to the world, and 
befits it. Like unto like. 

xciv. 
Pythagoras, the heathen philosopher, said, that the motion 
of the stars creates a very sweet harmony and celestial con- 
cord; but that people, through continual custom, have be- 
come cloyed therewith. Even so it is with us; we have sur- 



42 Luther's table-talk. 

passing fair creatures to our use, but by reason they are too 
common, we regard them not. 

xcv. 
Scarcely a small proportion of the earth bears corn, and yet 
we are all maintained and nourished. I verily believe that 
there grow not as many sheaves of corn as there are people 
in the world, and yet we are all fed; yea, and there remains 
a good surplus of corn at the year's end. This is a wonderful 
thing, which should make us see and perceive God's blessing. 

xcvi. 

The apparent cause why God passed so sharp a sentence 
upon Adam, was, that he had eaten of the forbidden tree, and 
was disobedient unto God, wherefore, for his sake, the earth 
w^as cursed, and mankind made subject to all manner of mise^ 
ries, fears, wants, sicknesses, plagues, and death. The reason 
of the worldly-wise, regarding only the biting of the apple, 
holds that for so slight and trivial a thing it was too cruel 
and hard a proceeding upon poor Adam, and takes ^.snuff xjx 
the nose, and says, or at least thinks: O, is it then so heinous 
a matter and sin for one to eat an apple? As people say of 
many sins that God expressly in his word has forbidden, 
such as drunkenness, &c.: What harm for one to be merry, 
and take a cup with good fellows? — concluding, according 
to their blindness, that God is too sharp and exacting. 

Again, these worldlings are offended that Christ, as they 
think, rejects good, honest, and holy people; that he will not 
know them, is harsh to them, sends them away from him, and 
calls them malefactors, though some in his name have pro- 
phesied, cast out devils, done miracles, &c., while, on the 
other hand, he receives public sinners, as strumpets, knaves, 
publicans, murderers, whom, if they hear his word, and be- 
lieve in him, he forgives, be their sins ever so great and 
many, yea, makes them righteous and holy, God's children, 
and heirs of everlasting life and salvation, out of mere grace 
and mercy, without any deserts, good works, and worthiness 
of theirs. This they conceive to be altogether unjust. 

Who can be here an arbitrator, the two things being as con- 
trary to each other as fire and water. Herein man's wisdom, 
his sense, reason, understanding, is made a fool. The Scrip- 
ture says: " Except ye be converted, and become like little 



OF god's works. 43 

children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of God." They 
who would investigate these things with human wit and wis- 
dom, give themselves much futile labour and disquiet; they will 
never learn how God is inclined towards them. In those, also, 
who so vainly trouble themselves, whether they be predestinated 
or forechosen, there goes up a fire in the heart, which they 
cannot quencli; so that their consciences are never at peace, 
but in the end they must despair. He, therefore, that will 
shun this enduring evil must hold fast the Word, where he 
will find that our gracious God has laid a sure and strong 
foundation, on which we may with certainty take footing — 
namely, Jesus Christ our Lord, through whom only we must 
enter into the kingdom of heaven ; for he, and no other, " is 
the way, the truth, and the life." 

We can understand the heavy temptations of that ever- 
lasting predestination, which terrifies many people, nowhere 
better than from the wounds of our Saviour, Christ Jesus, of 
whom the Father commanded, saying : " Him shall ye hear," 
But the wise of the world, the mighty, the high-learned, and 
the great, by no means heed these things, so that God re- 
mains unknown to them, notwithstanding they have much 
learning, and dispute and talk much of God; for it is a short 
conclusion: Without Christ, God will not be found, known, 
or comprehended. 

If now thou wilt know, why so few are saved, and so infi- 
nitely many damned, this is the cause: the world will not 
hear Christ; they care nothing for him, yea, contemn that 
which the Father testifies of him: " This is my well-beloved 
Son, in whom I am well pleased." 

Whereas all people that seek and labour to come to God, 
through any other means than only through Christ (as Jews, 
Turks, Papists, false saints, heretics, &c.), walk in horrible 
darkness and error ; and it helps them nothing that they lead 
an honest, sober kind of life, affect great devotion, suffer 
much, love and honour God, as they boast, &c. For seeing 
they will not hear Christ, or believe in him (without whom 
no man knows God, no man obtains forgiveness of sins, no 
man comes to the Father), they remain always in doubt and 
unbelief, know not how they stand with God, and so at last 
must die, and be lost in their sins. For, " He that 
honoureth not the Son,honoureth not the Father, "( I John, ii.) 



44 Luther's table-talk. 

" He tliat believeth not the Son, shall not see life, but the 
wrath of God remains upon him," (John, iii.) 

XCVII. 

It is often asked: Why desperate wretches have such good 
days, and live a long time in jollity and pleasure, to their 
heart's desire, with health of body, fine children, &c., while 
God allows the godly to remain in calamity, danger, anguish 
and want all their lives; yea, and some to die also in misery, 
as St. John the Baptist did, who was the greatest saint on 
earth, to say nothing of our only Saviour Jesus Christ. 

The prophets have all written much hereof, and shown how 
the godly should overcome such doubts, and comfort themselves 
against them. Jeremiah says, " Why goeth it so well with the 
ungodly, and wherefore are all they happy that deal very 
treacherously?" But further on, " Thou sufferest them to go at 
liberty like sheep that are to be slain, and thou preparest them 
for the day of slaughter." Read also Psalms xxxvii., xlix, 
Ixxiii. 

God is not therefore angry with his children, though he 
scourge and punish them; but he is angry with the ungodly 
that do not acknowledge Christ to be the Son of God, and the 
Saviour of the world, but blaspheme and contemn the Word; 
such are to expect no grace and help of him. And, indeed, 
he does not himself scourge and beat his small and poor 
flock that depend on Christ ; but suffers them to be chastened 
and beaten, when they become over secure and unthankful 
unto him for his unspeakable graces and benefits shown unto 
them in Christ, and are disobedient to his word; then permits 
he that the devil bruise our heels, and send pestilence and other 
plagues unto us; and that tyrants persecute us, and this for 
our good, that thereby we may be moved, and in a manner 
forced to turn ourselves unto him, to call upon him, to seek 
help and comfort from him, through Christ. 

XCVIII. 

" God is a God of the living, and not of the dead." This 
text shows the resurrection; for if there were no hope of 
the resurrection, or of another and better world, after this 
short and miserable life, wherefore should God offer himself 
to be our God, and say he will give us all that is necessary 
and healthful for us, and, in the end, deliver us out of all 



OF god's works. 45 

trouble, both temporal and spiritual? To what purpose should 
we hear his Word, and believe in him ? What were we the 
better when we cry and sigh to him in our anguish and need, 
that we wait with patience upon his comfort and salvation, 
upon his grace and benefits, shown in Christ? Why praise 
and thank him for them? Why be daily in danger, and suffer 
ourselves to be persecuted and slain for the sake of Christ's 
Word? 

Forasmuch as the everlasting, merciful God, through his 
Word and Sacraments, talks and deals with us, all other 
creatures excluded, not of temporal things which pertain to 
this vanishing life, and which in the beginning he provided 
richly for us, but as to where we shall go when we depart 
hence, and gives unto us his Son for a Saviour, delivering us 
from sin and death, and purchasing for us everlasting right- 
eousness, life, and salvation, therefore it is most certain, 
that we do not die away like the beasts that have no under- 
standing; but so many of us as sleep in Christ, shall through 
him be raised again to life everlasting at the last day, and 
the ungodly to everlasting destruction. (John, v., Dan. xii.) 

xcix. 

The most acceptable service we can do and show unto God, 
and which alone he desires of us, is, that he be praised of us ; 
but he is not praised, unless he be first loved; he is not loved, 
unless he be first bountiful and does well; he does well when 
he is gracious; gracious he is when he forgives sins. Now 
who are those that love him? They are that small flock of 
the faithful, who acknowledge such graces, and know that 
through Christ they have forgiveness of their sins. But the 
children of this world do not trouble themselves herewith; 
they serve their idol, that wicked and cursed Mammon: in 
the end he will reward them. 

c. 

Our loving Lord God wills that we eat, drink, and be 
merry, making use of his creatures, for therefore he created 
them. He will not that we complain, as if he had not given 
sufficient, or that he could not maintain our poor carcases; 
he asks only that we acknowledge him for our God, and thank 
hijQ for his gifts. 



46 Luther's table-talk. 

CI. 

He that has not God, let him have else what he will, is 
more miserable than Lazarus, who lay at the rich man's gate, 
and was starved to death. It will go with such, as it went 
with the glutton, that they must everlastingly hunger and 
want, and shall not have in their power so much as one drop 
of water. 

CII. 

Of Abraham came Isaac and Ishmael; of the patriarchs 
and holy fathers, came the Jews that crucified Christ; of the 
apostles came Judas the traitor; of the city Alexandria 
(where a fair, illustrious, and famous school was, and whence 
proceeded many upright and godly learned men) came Arius 
and Origen; of the Roman church, that yielded many holy 
martyrs, came the blasphemous Antichrist, the pope of Rome; 
of the holy men in Arabia, came Mohhammad; of Consttanti- 
nople, where many excellent emperors were, comes the Turk; 
of married women come adulteresses; of virgins, strumpets; 
of brethren, sons, and friends, come the cruellest enemies; of 
angels come devils; of kings come tyrants; of the gospel and 
godly truth come horrible lies; of the true church come here- 
tics; of Luther come fanatics, rebels, and enthusiasts. What 
wonder is it thei^that evil is among us, comes from us, and 
goes out of us; they must, indeed, be very evil things that can- 
not stay by such goodness; and they must also be very good, 
that can endure such evil things. 

cm. 
Though by reason of original sin many wild beasts hurt 
mankind, as lions, wolves, bears, snakes, adders, &c., yet the 
merciful God has in such manner mitigated our well-deserved 
punishments, that there are many more beasts that serve us 
for our good and profit, than of those which do us hurt: many 
more sheep than wolves, oxen than lions, cows than bears, 
deer than foxes, lobsters than scorpions, ducks, geese, and 
hens, than ravens and kites, &c.: in all creatures more good 
than evil, more benefits than hurts and hindrances. 

CIV. 

God will have his servants to be repenting sinners, standing 
in fear of his anger, of the devil, death and hell, and believing 
in Christ. David says, " The Lord is nigh unto them that 



OF god's works. 47 

are of a broken heart, and helpeth them that be of an humble 
spirit." And Isaiah, " Where shall my Spirit rest, and where 
shall I dwell? By them that are of humble spirit, and that 
stand in fear of my Word." So with the poor sinner on the 
cross. So with St. Peter, when he had denied Christ; with 
Mary Magdalen; with Paul the persecutor, &c. All these 
were sorrow^ful for their sins, and such shall have forgiveness 
of their sins, and be God's servants. 

The great prelates, the puffed up saints, the rich usurers, 
the ox drovers that seek unconscionable gain, &c., these are 
not God's servants, neither were it good they should be; for 
then no poor people could have access to God for them; neither 
were it for God's honour that such should be his servants, for 
tliey would ascribe the honour and praise to themselves. 

In the Old Testament, all the first-born were consecrated 
to God, both of mankind and of beasts. The first-born son had 
an advantage over his brethren; he was their lord, as the 
chief in offerings and riches, that is, in spiritual and temporal 
government; for he had a right to the priesthood and dominion, 
&c. But there are many examples in Holy Scriptures, where 
God rejected the first-bom, and chose the younger brethren, 
as Cain, Ishmael, Esau, Reuben, &c., who were first-born; 
from them God took their right, and gave it to their 
younger brethren, as to Abel, Isaac, Jacob, Judah, David, &c. 
And for this cause: That they were haughty, proud, and pre- 
suming on their first -birth, and despised their brethren, that 
were more goodly and godly than they; this God could not 
endure, and therefore they were bereaved of their honours, 
so that they could not boast themselves of their prior birth, 
although they were highly esteemed in the world, and were 
possessed of lands and people. 

cv. 

The Scriptures show two manner of sacrifices acceptable 
to God. The first is called a sacrifice of thanks or praise, 
and is w^hen we teach and preach God's. Word purely, when 
we hear and receive it with faith, w^hen we acknowledge it, 
and do everything that tends to the spreading of it abroad, 
and thank God from our hearts for the unspeakable benefits 
which through it are laid before us, and bestowed upon ua 
in Christ, when we praise and glorify him, &c. " Ofier unto 



49 LUTHER S TABLE-TALK, 

God thanksgiving." " He that ofFereth thanks praiseth me." 
" Thank the Lord, for he is gracious, because his mercy en- 
dureth for ever." " Praise the Lord, O my soul, and all that 
is within me praise his holy name. Praise the Lord, my 
soul, and forget not all his benefits." — Psalms. 

Secondly, when a sorrowful and troubled heart in all manner 
of temptations has his refuge in God, calls upon him in a true 
and upright faith, seeks help of him, and waits patiently upon 
him. Hereof the Psalms, " In my trouble I called upon the 
Lord, and he heard me at large." " The Lord is nigh unto 
them that are of a contrite heart, and will save such as be of 
an humble spirit." " The sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit; 
a broken and contrite heart, O God, shalt thou not despise." 
And again: " Call upon me in the time of need, so will I de- 
liver thee, and thou shalt praise me." 

cvi. 
If Adam had remained in his innocence, and had not trans- 
gressed God's command, yet had begotten children, he should 
not have lived and remained continually in that state in Para- 
dise, but would have been taken into the everlasting glory of 
heaven, not through death, but through being translated into 
another life. 

CVII. 

God scorns and mocks the devil, in setting under his very 
nose a poor, weak, human creature, mere dust and ashes, yet 
endowed with the first-fruits of the Spirit, against whom the 
devil can do nothing, though he is so proud, subtile, and 
powerful a spirit. We read in histories that a powerful king 
of Persia, besieging the city of Edessa, the bishop, seeing that 
all human aid was ineffectual, and that the city could not of 
itself hold out, ascended to the ramparts and prayed to God, 
making, at the same time, the sign of the cross, whereupon 
there was a wonderful host sent from God of great flies and 
gnats, which filled the horses' eyes, and dispersed the whole 
army. Even so God takes pleasure to triumph and over- 
come, not through power, but by weakness. 

CVIII. 

False teachers and sectaries are punishments for evil times, 
God's greatest ang<^' and displeasure; while godly teacheis 



OF GOD S WORKS. 49 

are glorious witnesses, God's graces and mercies. Hence St. 
Paul names apostles, evangelists, prophets, shepherds, teachers, 
&c., gifts and presents of our Saviour Christ, sitting at the 
right hand of the Father. And the prophet Micah compares 
teachers of the gospel to a fruitful rain. 

cix. 
Melancthon asked Luther if this word, hardened, " harden- 
eth whom he will," were to be understood directly as it 
sounded, or in a figurative sense? Luther answered: We 
must understand it specially and not operatively: for God 
works no evil. Through his almighty power he works all in 
all; and as he finds a man, so he works in him, as he did in 
Pharaoh, who was evil by nature, which was not God's, but his 
own fault; he continually went on in his wickedness, doiny 
evil; he was hardened, because God with his spirit and grace 
hindered not his ungodly proceedings, but suffered him to go 
on, and to have his way. Why God did not hinder or 
restrain him, we ought not to inquire. 

ex. 

God styles himself, in all the Holy Scriptures, a God of 
life, of peace, of comfort, and joy, for the sake of Christ. I 
hate myself, that I cannot believe it so constantly and surely 
as I should; but no human creature can rightly know how 
mercifully God is inclined toward those that steadfastly be- 
lieve in Christ. 

CXI. 

The second Psalm is one of the best Psalms. I love that 
Psalm with my heart. It strikes and flashes valiantly amongst 
kings, princes, counsellors, judges, &c. If what this Psalm 
says be true, then are the allegations and aims of the papists 
stark lies and folly. If I were as our Lord God, and had 
committed the government to my son, as he to his Son, 
and these vile people were as disobedient as they now be, I 
would knock the world in pieces. 

CXII. 

If a man serve not God only, then surely he serves the 
devil; because no man can serve God, unless he have his 
Word and command. Therefore, if his Word and com- 
mand be not in thy heart, thou servest not God, but thine 



50 LUTHER S TABLE-TALK. 

own will; for that is upright serving of God, Avhen a man 
does that which in his Word God has commanded to be done, 
every one in his vocation, not that which he thinks good of 
his own judgment. 

CXIII. 

It troubles the hearts of people not a little, that God seems 
as though he were mutable or fickle-minded; for he gave to 
Adam the promise and ceremonies, which afterwards he altered 
with the rainbow and the ark of Noah. He gave to Abraham 
the circumcision, to Moses he gave miraculous signs, to his 
people, the law. But to Christ, and through Christ, he gave 
the Gospel; which amounts to the abolition of all the former. 
Hence the Turks take advantage of these proceedings of God, 
saying: The laws of the Christians may be established, and 
endure for a time, but at last they will be altered. 

cxiv. 
I was once sharply reprimanded by a popish priest, be- 
cause, with such passion and vehemence, I reproved the 
people. I answered him: Our Lord God must first send a 
sharp, pouring shower, with thunder and lightning, and after- 
wards cause it mildly to rain, as then it wets finely through. 
I can easily cut a willow or a hazel wand with my trencher- 
knife; but for a hard oak, a man must use the axe; and little 
enough, to fell and cleave it. 

cxv. 
Plato, the heathen, said of God: God is nothing and yet 
everything; him followed Eck and the sophists, who under- 
stood nothing thereof, as their words show. But we must 
understand and speak of it in this manner: God is incom- 
prehensible and invisible; that, therefore, which may be seen 
and comprehended, is not God. And thus, in another man- 
ner, God is visible and invisible : visible in his w^ord and 
works ; and where his word and works are not, there a man 
should not desire to have him ; or he will, instead of God, 
take hold of the devil. Let us not flutter too high, but 
remain by the manger and the swaddling clothes of Christ, 
*' in whom dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily." 
There a man cannot fail of God, but finds him most 



OF GODS WORKS. 5* 

certainly. Human comfort and divine comfort are of dif- 
ferent natures: human comfort consists in external, visible 
help, which a man may see, hold, and feel; divine comfort 
only in words and promises, where there is neither seeing, 
hearing, nor feeling. 

cxvi. 

When we see no way or means, by advice or aid, through 
which we may be helped in our miseries, we at onee conclude, 
according to our human reason: now our condition is des- 
perate; but when we believe trustingly in God, our deliver- 
ance begins. The physician says: Where philosophy ends, 
physic begins; so we say: Where human help is at an end, 
God's help begins, or faith in God's word. Trials and tempta- 
tions appear before deliverance, after deliverance comes joy. 
To be suppressed and troubled, is to arise, to grow and to 
increase. 

CXVII. 

The devil, too, has his amusement and pleasure, which 
consists in suppressing God's work, and tormenting those 
that love God's word, and hold fast thereby; so the true 
Christians, being God's kingdom, must be tormented and 
oppressed. 

A true Christian must have evil days, and suffer much; 
our Adam's flesh and blood must have good and easy days, 
and suffer nothing. How may these agree together? Our 
flesh is given over to death and hell: if our flesh is to be 
delivered from death, hell, and the devil, it must keep and 
hold to God's commandments — i. e., must believe in Christ 
Jesus, that he is the Son of God and our Redeemer, and 
must cleave fast to his word, believing that he will not suffer 
us to be plagued everlastingly, but will deliver and remove 
us out of this life into life eternal; giving us, at the same 
time, patience under the cross, and to bear with the weakness 
of another, who is also under the cross, and holds with Christ. 

Therefore, he that will boast himself to be Christ's dis- 
ciple, a true Christian, and saved, must not expect good 
days; but all his faith, hope, and love must be directed to 
God, and to his neighbour, that so his whole life be nothing 
else tt.an the cross, persecution, adversity, and tribulation. 

E 2 



52 Luther's table-talk. 



CXVIII. 



'W'"hat is it we poor wretched people aim at? "We who 
cannot, as yet, comprehend with our faith the merest sparks 
of God's promises, the bare glimmering of his commandments 
and works, — both of which, notwithstanding he himself has 
confirmed with words and miracles, — weak, impure, corrupt 
as we are, — presumptuously seek to understand the incom- 
prehensible majesty of the incomprehensible light of God's 
wonders. 

We must know that he dwells in a light to which human 
creatures cannot come, and yet we go on, and essay to reach 
it. We know that his judgments are incomprehensible, and 
his ways past finding out, (Rom. xi.,) yet we undertake to 
find them out. We look, with blind eyes like a mole, on the 
majesty of God, and after that light which is shown neither 
in words nor miracles, but only signified; out of curiosity 
and wilfulness we would behold the highest and greatest 
light of the celestial sun ere we see the morning star. Let 
the morning star, as St. Peter says, go first up in our 
hearts, and we shall then see the sun in his noon-tide splen- 
dour. 

True, we must teach, as we may, of God's incomprehensible 
and unsearchable will; but to aim at its perfect comprehen- 
sion is dangerous work, wherein we stumble, fall, and break 
our necks. I bridle myself with these words of our Saviour 
Christ to St. Peter: " Follow thou me : what is it to thee?" 
&c., for Peter busied himself also about God's works; namely, 
how he would do with anotlier, how he would do with John'* 
And as he answered Philip, that said, " Show us the Father" 
— " What," said Christ; " believest thou not that the Father 
is in me, and I in the Father? He that seeth me, seeth the 
Father also," &c. For Philip would also willingly have seen 
the majesty and fellowship of the Father. Solomon, the wise 
king, says: " What is too high for thee, thereafter inquire 
thou not." And even did we know all the secret judgments 
of God, what good and profit would it bring unto us, more 
than God's promises and commandments? 

Let us abstain from such cogitations, seeing we know for 
certain that they are incomprehensible. Let us not permit 
ourselves to be so plagued by the devil with that which is 



OF god's works. 53 

impossible. A man might as well busy himself how tlie 
kingdom of the earth shall endure upon the waters, and go 
not down beneath them. Above all things, let us exercise 
the faith of God's promises, and the works of his command- 
ments; when we have done this, we may well consider 
whether it is expedient to trouble oneself about impossible 
things, though it is a very difficult thing to expel such 
thoughts, so fiercely drives the devil. A man must as 
vehemently strive against such cogitations as against un- 
belief, despair, heresies, and such like temptations. For most 
of us are deceived herewith, not believing they proceed from 
the devil, who yet himself fell through those very cogitations, 
assuming to be equal with the jMost Highest, and to know 
all that God knows, and scorning to know what he ought to 
know, and what was needful for him. 

CXIX. 

High mysteries in the Scriptures being hard to be under- 
stood, confound unlearned and light spirits so as to produce 
many errors and heresies, to their own and others' condemna- 
tion. 'Twas therefore Moses described the creation so briefly, 
whereas he spends a whole chapter in narrating the pur- 
chase of the field and cave over against Hebron, that Abra- 
ham bought of Ephron the Hittite, for a sepulchre to bury 
Sara in. He describes, likewise, through many chapters, 
divers sorts of sacrifices, and other customs and ceremonies, 
for he well knew that such like produce no heresies. Many 
things were written and described ere Moses was born. 
Doubtless, Adam briefly noted the history of the creation, of 
his fall, of the promised seed, &c. The other patriarchs 
afterwards, no doubt, each set down what was done in his 
time, especially Noah. Afterwards Moses, as I conceive, 
took and brought all into a right method and order, diminish- 
ing therefrom, and adding thereunto, such things as God 
commanded; as, especially, touching the seed that should 
crush the serpent's head, the history of the creation, &c.; all 
which, doubtless, he had out of the sermons of the patriarchs, 
that always one inherited from another. For I verily be- 
lieve, that the sermon of the Avoman's seed, promised to Adam 
and Eve, after which they had so hearty a longing and yearn- 
ing, was preached more j^owerfully before the deluge, than 



54 Luther's table-talk. 

now in these dangerous times the sermons of Christ are 
preached with us. 

cxx. 

I would givd a world to have the acts and legends of the 
patriarchs who lived before the deluge; for therein a man 
might see how thej lived, preached, and what they suffered. 
But it pleased our Lord God to overwhelm all their acts and 
legends in the deluge, because he linew that those which 
should come after, would not regard, much less understand 
them; therefore God would keep and preserve them until 
they met again together in the life to come. But then, I 
am sure, the loving patriarchs who lived after the deluge, 
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, &c.; the prophets, the apostles, their 
posterity, and other holy people, whom in this life the devil 
would not leave untempted, will yield unto the patriarchs, 
that lived before the deluge, and give to them pre-eminence 
in divine and spiritual honour, saying: Ye loving and most 
venerable patriarchs! I preached but a few years, spreading 
God's word abroad, and therefore suffered the cross; but what 
is that in comparison with the great, tedious, intolerable 
labour and pains, anguish, torments, and plagues, which ye, 
holy fathers, endured before the deluge, some of you, seven 
hundred, some eight hundred years, some longer, of the devil 
and the wicked world. 

CXXL 

As lately I lay very sick, so sick that I thought I should 
have left this world, many cogitations and musings had I in 
my weakness. Ah! thought I, wiiat may eternity be? What 
joys may it have? However, I know for certain, that this 
eternity is ours; through Christ it is given and prepared for 
us, if we can but believe. There it shall be opened and re- 
vealed; here we shall not know when a second creation of the 
world will be, seeing we understand not the first. If I had 
been with God Almighty before he created the world, I could 
not have advised him how out of nothing to make this 
globe, the firmament, and that glorious sun, which in its swift 
course gives light to the whole earth; how, in such manner, 
to create man and woman, &c., all which he did for us, 
without our counsel. Therefore ought we justly to give him 



OF god's works. 65 

the honour, and leave to his divine power and goodness the 
new creation of the life to come, and not presume to speculate 
thereon. 

CXXII. 

I hold that the name Paradise applies to the whole worl» 
Moses describes more particularly what fell within Adam's 
sight before his fall — a sweet and pleasant place, watered by four 
rivers. After he had sinned, he directed his steps towards 
Syria, and the earth lost its fertility. Samaria and Judoea 
were once fruitful lands, worthy to be Paradise, but they are 
now arid sand, for God has cursed them. 

Even so, in our time, has God cursed fruitful lands, and 
caused them to be barren and unfruitful by reason of our 
sins; for where God gives not his blessing, there grows 
nothing that is good and profitable, but where he blesses, 
there all things grow plentifully, and are fruitful. 

CXXIII. 

Dr. Jonas, inviting Luther to dinner, caused a bunch of 
ripe cherries to be hung over the table where they dined, in 
remembrance of the creation, and as a suggestion to his guests 
to praise God for creating such fruits. But Luther said: Why 
not rather remember this in one's children, that are the fruit of 
one's body? For these are far more excelling creatures of God 
than all the fruits of trees. In them we see God's power, 
wisdom, and art, who made them all out of nothing, gave 
them life and limbs, exquisitely constructed, and will main- 
tain and preserve them. Yet how little do we regard this. 
When people have children, all the efiect is to make them 
grasping, raking together all they can to leave behind them. 
They do not know, that before a child comes into the world, 
it has its lot assigned already, and that it is ordained and de- 
termined what and how much it shall have. In the married 
state we find that the conception of children depends not on 
our will and pleasure; we never know whether we shall be 
fruitful or no, or whether God will give us a son or a 
daughter. All this goes on without our counsel. My father 
and mother did not imagine they should have brought a spi- 
ritual overseer into the world. 'Tis God's work only, and 
this we cannot enter into. I believe that, in tlie life to come, 



56 Luther's table-talk. 

we shall have nothing to do, but to meditate on and marvel 
at our Creator and his creatures. 

cxxiv. 
A comet is a star that runs, not being fixed like a planet, but 
a bastard among planets. It is a haughty and proud star, en- 
grossing the whole element, and carrying itself as if it were 
there alone. 'Tis of the nature of heretics, who also will be 
singular and alone, bragging and boasting above others, and 
thinking they are the only people endued with understanding. 

cxxv. 

Whereto serve or profit such superfluity, such show, such 
ostentation, such extraordinarily luxurious kind of life as 
is now come upon us. If Adam were to return to earth, and 
see our mode of living, our food, drink, and dress, how would 
he marvel. He would say : Surely, this is not the world 
I was in; it was, doubtless, another Adam than I, who ap- 
peared among men heretofore. For Adam drank water, ate 
fruit from the trees, and, if he had any house at all, 'twas a 
hut, supported by four wooden forks; he had no knife, or 
iron; and he wore simply a coat of skin. Now we spend 
immense sums in eating and drinking; now we raise sump- 
tuous palaces, and decorate them with a luxury beyond all 
comparison. The ancient Israelites lived in great mode- 
ration and quiet; Boaz says: "Dip thy bread in vinegar, and 
refresh thyself therewith." Judcea w^as full of people, as we 
read in the book of Joshua; and a great multit'ade of people 
gives a lesson to live sparingly. 

cxxvi. 
Adam, our father, was, doubtless, a most miserable, piagued 
man. 'Twas a mighty solitariness for him to be alone in 
so wide and vast a world; but when he, with Eve, his only 
companion and loving consort, obtained Cain their son, then 
there was great joy, and so, when Abel was born; but soon 
after followed great trouble, misery, and sorrow of heart, 
when one brother slew another, and Adam thereby lost one 
son, and the other was banished and proscribed from his sight. 
This surely was a great cross and sorrow, so that the murder 
caused him more grief than his own fall; but he, with bis 



OF god's tvorks. 5*^ 

loving Eve, were reduced again to a solitary kind of life. 
Afterwards, when .he was one hundred and thirty years old, 
he had Seth. Miserable and lamentable was his fall, for 
during nine hundred years he saw God's anger in the death 
of every human creature. Ah ! no human creature can con- 
ceive his perplexities: our sufferings, in comparison with his, 
are altogether children's toys; but he was afterwards com- 
forted and refreshed again with the promise, through faith, 
of the woman's seed. 

CXXVII. 

All wild beasts are beasts of the law, for they live in fear 
and quaking; they have all swarthy and black flesh, by reason 
of their fear, but tame beasts have white flesh, for they are 
beasts of grace; they live securely with mankind. 

CXXVIII. 

After Adam had lost the righteousness in which God had 
created him, he was, without doubt, much decciyed in bodily 
strength, by reason of his anguish and sorrow of heart. I 
believe that before the fall he could have seen objects a hun- 
dred miles off better than we can see them at half a mile, and 
so in proportion with all the other senses. No doubt, after 
the fall, he said: " Ah, God! what has befallen me? I am 
both blind and deaf." It was a horrible fall; for, before, all 
creatures were obedient unto hirn, so that he could play even 
with the serpent. 

cxxix. 

Twenty years is but a short time, yet in that short time 
the world were empty, if there was no marrying and pro- 
duction of children. God assembles unto himself a Christian 
church out of little children. For I believe, when a little 
child dies of one year old, that always one, yea, two thousand 
die with it, of that age or younger; but when I, Luther, die, 
that am sixty-three, I believe that not three-score, or one hun- 
dred at the most, will die with me of that age, or older; for 
people now grow not old; not many people live to my years. 
Mankind is nothing else but a sheep-shambles, where we 
are slain and slaughtered by the devil. How many sorts of 
deaths are in our bodies? Nothing is therein but death. 



58 Luther's table-talk. 

cxxx. 
It is in the father's power to disinherit a disobedient child; 
God commanded, by Moses, that disobedient children should 
be stoned to death, so that a father may cleai'ly disinherit a 
son, yet with this proviso, that, upon bettering and amend- 
ment, he reinstate him. 

cxxxi. 
What need had our early ancestors of other food than 
fruits and herbs, seeing these tasted so well and gave such 
strength? The pomegranates and oranges, without doubt, 
yielded such a sweet and pleasant smell, that one might have 
been satisfied with the scent thereof; and I am sure Adam, 
before his fall, never wanted to eat a partridge; but the 
deluge spoiled all. It follows not, that because God created 
all things, we must eat of all things. Fruits were created 
chiefly as food for people and for beasts; the latter were 
created to the end we should laud and praise God. Where - 
unto serve the stars, but only to praise their Creator? 
Whereunto serve the raven and crows, but to call upon the 
Lord who nourishes them. 

CXXXII. 

There's no doubt that all created things have degenerated 
by reason of original sin. The serpent was at first a lofty, 
noble animal, eating without fear from Eve's hand, but after 
it was cursed, it lost its feet, and wag fain to crawl and eat 
on the ground. It was precisely because the serpent, at that 
time, was the most beautiful of creatures, that Satan selected 
it for his work, for the devil likes beauty, knowing that 
beauty attracts men unto evil. A fool serves not as a pro- 
vocative to heresy, nor a deformed maid-servant to liber- 
tinism, nor water to drunkenness, nor rags to vanity. Con- 
sider the bodies of children, how much sweeter and purer 
and more beautiful they are than those of grown persons; 
'tis because childhood approaches nearer to the state of inno- 
cence wherein Adam lived before his fall. In our sad con- 
dition, our only consolation is the expectation of another life. 
Here below all is incomprehensible. 

CXXXIII. 

Dr. Luther, holding a rose in his hand, said: 'Tis a mag- 
nificent work of God: could a man make but one such rose 



OF THE NATURE OF THE WORLD. 59 

as this, he would be thought worthj of all honour, but the 
gifts of God lose their value in our eyes, from their very 
infinity. How wonderful is the resemblance between chil- 
dren and their parents. A man shall have half-a-dozen sons, 
all like him as so many peas are like another, and these sons 
again their sons, with equal exactness of resemblance, and 
so it goes on. The heathen noticed these likenesses. Dido 
says to jS^neas: 

" Si milii parvulus iEneas luderet in aula, 
Qui te tantum ore referret." 

'Twas a form of malediction among the Greeks, for a man to 
wish that his enemy's son might be unlike him in face. 

cxxxiv. 

'Tis wonderful how completely the earth is fertilized by 
currents of water running in all directions and constantly re- 
plenished by snow, rain, and dew. 



OF THE NATURE OF THE WORLD. 

cxxxv. 
He that is now a prince, wants to be a king or an emperor. 
A man in love with a girl is ever casting about how he may 
come to marry her, and in his eyes there is none fairer than 
she; when he has got her, he is soon weary of her, and thinks 
another more fair, vvhom easily he might have had. The 
poor man thinks, had I but twenty pounds I should be rich 
enough; but when he has got that, he would have more. The 
heart is inconsistent in all things, as the heathen says: Virtutew 
prcBsentem odimus, sublatam ex oculis qucerimus invidi. 

cxxxvi. 

One knife cuts better than another; so, likewise, one that 
has learned languages and arts can better and more distinctly 
teach than another. But in that many of them, as Erasmus 
and others, are well versed in languages and arts, and yet 
err with great hurt, 'tis as with the greater sort of weapons, 



60 LUTHER S TABLE-TALK. 

which are made to kill: we must distinguish the thing from 
the abuse. 

C XXXVII. 

The wickedness of the enemies of the Word is not human, 
but altogether devilish. A human creature is wicked accord- 
ing to the manner and nature of mankind, and according as 
he is spoiled through original sin, but when he is possessed 
and driven of the devil, then begins the most bitter and cruel 
combat between him and the woman's seed. 

CXXXVIII. 

The world will neither hold God for God, nor the devil 
for the devil. And if a man were left to himself, to do after 
his own kind and nature, he would willingly throw our Lord 
God out at the window; for the world regards God nothing 
at all, as the psalm says: The wicked man saith in his heart, 
there is no God. 

CXXXIX. 

The god of the world is riches, pleasure, and pride, where- 
with it abuses all the creatures and gifts of God. 

CXL. 

We have the nature and manner of all wild beasts in eat- 
ing. The wolves eat sheep; we also. The foxes eat hens, 
geese, &c. ; we also. The hawks and kites eat fowl and 
"birds; we also. Pikes eat other fish; we also. With oxen, 
horse, and kine, we also eat salads, grass, &c. 

CXLI. 

I much wonder how the heathen could write such fair and 
excellent things of death, seeing it is so grisly and fearful! 
But when I remember the nature of the world, then I 
wonder nothing at all; for they saw great evil and wicked- 
ness flourishing among them, and in their rulers, which 
sorely grieved them, and they had nothing else to threaten 
and terrify their rulers with, but death. 

Now, if the heathen so little regarded death, nay, so highly 
and honourably esteemed it, how much more so ought we 
Christians? For they, poor people, knew less than nothing 



OF THE NATURE OF THE WORLD. 61 

of the life eternal, while we know and are instructed in it; 
yet, when we only speak of death, we are all affrighted. 

The cause hereof is our sins; we live worse than the 
heathen, and therefore cannot justly complain, for the 
greater our sins, the more fearful is death. See those who 
have rejected God's word: when they are at the point of 
death, and are put in mind of the day of judgment, how 
fearfully do they tremble and shake. 

CXLII. 

Here, to-day, have I been pestered with the knaveries 
and lies of a baker, brought before me for using false weights, 
though such matters concern the m^igistrate rather than the 
divine. Yet if no one were to check the thefts of these 
bakers, we should have a fine state of things. 

CXLIII. 

There is not a more dangerous evil than a flattering, dis- 
sembling counsellor. While he talks, his advice has hands 
and feet, but when it should be put in practice, it stands like 
a mule, which will not be spurred forward. 

CXLIV. 

There are three sorts of people: the first, the common sort, 
who live secure without remorse of conscience, acknowledging 
not their corrupt manners and natures, insensible of God's 
wrath against their sins, and careless thereof. The second, 
those who through the law are scared, feel God's anger, and 
strive and wrestle with despair. The third, those that ac- 
knowledge their sins and God's merited wrath, feel themselves 
conceived and born in sin, and therefore deserving of perdi- 
tion, but, notwithstanding, attentively hearken to the gospel, 
and believe that God, out of grace, for the sake of Jesus 
Christ, forgives sins, and so are justified before God, and 
afterwards show the fruits of their faith by all manner of 
good works. 

CXLV. 

That matrimony is matrimony, that the hand is a hand, 
that goods are goods, people well understand; but to believe 
that matrimony is God's creation and ordinance, that ttie 
hands, that the goods, as food and raiment, and other crea- 



62 LUTHER*S TABLE-TALK. 

tures we use, are given and presented unto us of God, 'tis 
God's special work and grace when men believe it. 

CXLVI. 

The heart of a human creature is like quicksilver, now 
here, now there; this day so, to-morrow otherwise. There- 
fore vanity is a poor miserable thing, as Ecclesiasticus says. 
A man desires and longs after things that are uncertain and 
of doubtful result, but contemns that which is certain, done, 
J and accomplished. Therefore what God gives us we will not 
I have; for which cause Christ would not govern on earth, 
but gave it over to the devil, saying, " Rule thou." God is 
of another nature, manner, and mind. I, he says, am God, 
and therefore change not; I hold fast and keep sure my 
promises and threatenings. 

CXLVII. 

He must be of a high and great spirit that undertakes to 
serve the people in body and soul, for he must suffer the 
utmost danger and unthankfulness. Therefore Christ said to 
Peter, Simon, &c., "Lovest thou me?" repeating it three 
times together. Then he said: "Feed my sheep:" as if he 
would say, " Wilt thou be an upright minister, and a shep- 
herd? then love must only do it, thy love to me; for how else 
could ye endure unthankfulness, and spend wealth and 
health, meeting only with persecution and ingratitude?" 

CXLVIII. 

The highest wisdom of the world is to busy itself with 
temporal, earthly, and ephemeral things; and when these go 
ill, it says, Who would have thought it? But faith is a 
certain and sure expectation of that which a man hopes for, 
making no doubt of that w^hich yet he sees not. A true Chris- 
tian does not say: I had not thought it, but is most certain 
that the beloved cross is near at hand; and thus is not afraid 
when it goes ill with him, and he is tormented. But the 
world, and those who live secure in it, cannot bear misfor- 
tune; they go on continually dancing in pleasure and 
delight, like the rich glutton in the gospel. He could not 
spare the scraps to poor Lazarus; but Lazarus belongs to 
Christ, and will take his part with him. 



OF THE NATURE OF THE WORLD. 63 

CXLIX. 

The world seems to me like a decayed house, David and 
the i)rophets being the spars, and Christ the main pillar in 
the midst, that supports all. 

CL. 

As all people feel they must die, each seeks immortality 
here on earth, that he may be had in everlasting remembrance. 
Some great princes and kings seek it by raising great columns 
of stone, and high pyramids, great churches, costly and 
glorious palaces, castles, &c. Soldiers hunt after praise and 
honour, by obtaining famous victories. The learned seek an 
everlasting name by writing books. With these, and such 
like things, people think to be immortal. But as to the true, 
everlasting, and incorruptible honour and eternity of God, 
no man thinks or looks after it. Ah! we are poor, silly, 
miserable people!; 

CLI. 

To live openly among the people is best; Christ so lived 
and walked, openly and publicly, here on earth, amongst the 
people, and told his disciples to do the like. 'Tis in cells 
and corners that the wicked wretches, the monks and nuns, 
lead shameful lives. But openly, and among people, a man 
must live decently and honestly. 

CLII. 

To comfort a sorrowful conscience is much better than to 
possess many kingdoms; yet the world regards it not; nay, 
contemns it, calling us rebels, disturbers of the peace, and 
blasphemers of God, turning and altering religion. They 
will be their own prophets, and prophesy to themselves; but 
this to us is a great grief of heart. The Jews said of Christ, 
If we suffer him to go on in this manner, the Romans will 
come and take from us land and people. After they had 
slain Christ, did the Romans come or not? Yea, they came, 
and slew a hundred thousand of them, and destroyed their 
city. Even so the contemners and enemies of the Word will 
disturb the peace, and turn Germany upside down. We 
bring evil upon ourselves, for we wilfully oppose the truth. 

CLIII. 

Tf Moses had continued to work his miracles in Egypt but 
two or three years, tlie people would have become accustomed 



64 LUTHER S TABLE-TALK. 

thereto, and heedless, as we who are accustomed to the sun 
and moon, hold them in no esteem. 

CLIV. 

Abraham was held in no honour among the Canaaixites, 
for all the wells he had dug the neighbours filled up, or took 
away by force, and said to him: Wilt thou not suffer it? 
then pack thee hence and be gone, for thou art with us a 
stranger and a new comer. In like manner, Isaac was 
despised. The faith possessed by the beloved patriarchs, 
1 am not able sufficiently to admire. How firmly and 
constantly did they believe that God was gracious unto 
them, though they suffered such exceeding trouble and 
adversity ! 

CLV. 

If the great pains and labour I take sprang not from the 
love, and for the sake of him that died for me, the world 
could not give me money enough to write only one book, or 
to translate the Bible. I desire not to be rewarded and paid 
of the world for my books; the world is too poor to give me 
satisfaction; I have not asked the value of one penny of my 
master the Prince Elector of Saxony, since I have been here. 
The world is nothing but a reversed Decalogue, or the ten 
commandments backwards, a mask and picture of the devil, 
all contemners of God, all blasphemers, all disobedient; 
harlotry, pride, theft, murder, &c. are now almost ripe for 
the slaughter. 

CLVT. 

Dr. Luther's wife complaining to him of the indocility and 
untrustworthiness of servants, he said: A faithful and good 
servant is a real God- send, but, truly, 'tis a rare bird in the 
land. "We find every one complaining of the idleness and 
profligacy of this class of people; we must govern them, 
Turkish fashion, so much work, so much victuals, as Pharaoh 
dealt with the Israelites in Egypt. 

CLVII. 

The philosophers, and learned among the heathen, had 
innumerable speculations as to God, the soul, and the life ever- 
lasting, all uncertain and doubtful, they being without God's 
"Word J while to us, God has given his most sweet and saving 



OF THE NATURE OF THE WORLD. 65 

Word, pure and incorrupt; yet we contemn it. It is naught, 
says the buyer. When we have a thing, how good soever, 
we are soon weary of it, and regard it not. The world 
remains the world, which neither loves nor endures righteous- 
ness, but is ruled by a certain few, even as a little boy of 
twelve years old rules, governs, and keeps a hundred great 
and strong oxen upon a pasture. 

CLVIII. 

Whoso relies on his money prospers not. The richest 
monarchs have had ill fortune, have been destroyed and slain 
in the wars; while men with but small store of money have 
had great fortune and victory; as the emperor Maximilian 
overcame the Venetians, and continued warring ten years 
with them, though ihey were exceedingly rich and powerful. 
Therefore we ought not to trust in money or wealth, or 
depend thereon. I hear that the prince elector, George, 
begins to be covetous, which is a sign of his death very 
shortly. When I saw Dr. Gode begin to tell his puddings 
hanging in the chimney, I told him he would not live long, 
and so it fell out; and when I begin to trouble myself about 
brewing, malting, booking, &c., then shall I soon die. 

CLTX. 

We should always be ready when God knocks, prepared to 
take our leave of this world like Christians. For even as the 
small beast kills the stag, leaping upon his head, and sitting 
between his horns, and eating out his brains, or catches him 
fast by the throat, and gnaws it asunder, even so the devil, 
when he possesses a human creature, is not soon or easily 
pulled from him, but leads him into despair, and hurts him 
both in soul and body; as St. Peter says: "He goeth about 
like a roaring lion." 

CLX. 

Before Noah's flood the world was highly learned, by 
reason men lived a long time, and so attained great experi- 
ence and wisdom; now, ere we begin rightly to come to the 
true knowledge of a thing, we lie down and die. God will 
not have that we should attain a higher knowledge of 
things. 



66 Luther's table-talk. 

CLXI. 

Mammon has two properties; it makes us secure, first, when 
it goes well with us, and then we live without fear of God at 
all; secondly, when it goes ill with us, then we tempt God, 
fly from him, and seek after another God. 

CLXII. 

I saw a dog, at Lintz in Austria, that was taught to go 
with a hand-basket to the butchers' shambles for _c-.t; when 
other dogs came about him, and sought to take the meat out 
of the basket, he set it down, and fought lustily with them; 
but when he saw they were too strong for him, he himself 
would snatch out the first piece of meat, lest he should lose 
all. Even so does now our emperor Charles; who, after 
having long protected spiritual benefices, seeing that every 
prince takes possession of monasteries, himself takes posses- 
sion of bishoprics, as just now he has seized upon those of 
Utrecht and Liege. 

CLXIII. 

A covetous farmer, well known at Erfurt, carried his corn 
to sell there in the market, but selling it at too dear a rate, 
no man would buy of him, or give him his price. He being 
thereby moved to anger, said: " I will not sell it cheaper, but 
rather carry it home again, and give it to the mice." When 
he had come home with it, an infinity of mice and rats flocked 
into his house, and devoured up all his corn. And, next day, 
going out to see his grounds, which were newly sown, he 
found that all the seed was eaten up, while no hurt at all was 
done to the grounds of his neighbours. This certainly was 
a just punishment from God, a merited token of his wrath. 

Three rich farmers have lately, God be praised, hanged 
themselves: these wretches, that rob the whole country, de- 
serve such punishments; for the dearth at this time is a 
wilful dearth. God has given enough, but the devil has pos- 
sessed such wicked cormorants to withhold it. They are 
thieves and murderers of their poor neighbours. Christ will 
say unto them at the last day: " I was hungry, and ye have 
not fed me." Do not think, thou that sellest thy corn so 
dear, that thou shalt escape punishment, for thou art an occa- 
sion of the deaths and famishing of the poor; the devil will 
fetch thee away. They that fear God and trust in him, pray 



OF THE NATURE OF THE WORLD. 67 

for their, daily bread, and against snch robbers as thou, that 
either thou mayest be put to shame, or be reformed. 

CLXIV. 

A man that depends on the riches and honours of this 
world, forgetting God and the welfare of his soul, is like a 
little child that holds a fair apple in the hand, of agreeable 
exterior, promising goodness, but within 'tis rotten and full 
of worms. 

CLXV. 

"Where great wealth is, there are also all manner of sins; 
for through wealth comes pride, through pride, dissension, 
through dissejQsion, wars, through wars, poverty, through po- 
verty, great distress and misery. Therefore, they that are 
rich, must yield a strict and great account; for to whom much 
is given, of him much will be required. 

CLXVI. 

Riches, understanding, beauty, are fair gifts of God, but 
we abuse them shamefully. Yet worldly wisdom and wit are 
evils, when the cause engaged in is evil, for no man will yield 
his own particular conceit; every one will be right. Much 
better is it that one be of a fair and comely complexion in the 
face, for the hard lesson, sickness, may come and take that 
away; but the self-conceited mind is not so soon brought to 
reason. 

CLXVII. 

Wealth is the smallest thing on earth, the least gift that 
God has bestowed on mankind. What is it in comparison 
with God's Word — what, in comparison with corporal gifts, 
as beauty, health, &c.? — nay, what is it to the gifts of the 
mind, as understanding, wisdom, &c.? Yet are men so eager 
after it, that no labour, pains, or risk is regarded in the ac- 
quisition of riches. Wealth has in it neither material, formal, 
efficient, nor final cause, nor anything else that is good; there- 
fore 9ur Lord God commonly gives riches to those from whom 
he withholds spiritual good. 

CLXVill. 

St. John says: " He that hath this world's goods, and seeth 
his brother have need, and shutteth up his bowels of compas- 

f2 



68 Luther's table-talk. 

sion from him, how dwelleth the love of God in him?** And 
Christ: " He that desireth of thee, give to him" — that is, to 
him that needs and is in want; not to idle, lazy, wasteful 
fellows, who are commonly the greatest beggars, and who, 
though we give them much and often, are nothing helped 
thereby. Yet when one is truly poor, to him I will give 
with all my heart, according to my ability. And no man 
should forget the Scripture: " He that hath two coats, 
let him part with one;" meaning all manner of apparel that 
one has need of, according to his state and calling, as well for 
predit as for necessity. As also, by " the daily bread," is 
understood all maintenance necessary for the body. 

CLXIX. 

Lendest thou aught? so gettest thou it not again. Even 
if it be restored, it is not so soon as it ought to be restored, 
nor so well and good, and thou losest a friend thereby. 

CLXX. 

Before I translated the New Testament out of the Greek, 
all longed after it; when it was done, their longing lasted 
scarce four weeks. Then they desired the Books of Moses; 
when I had translated these, they had enough thereof in a 
short time. After that, they would have the Psalms; of 
these they were soon weary, and desired other books. So 
will it be with the Book of Ecclesiasticus, which they now 
long for, and about which I have taken great pains. All is 
acceptable until our giddy brains be satisfied: afterwards we 
let things lie, and seek after new. 



OF IDOLATRY. 

CLXXI. 

Idolatry is all manner of seeming holiness and worshipping, 
let these counterfeit spiritualities shine outwardly as glorious 
and fair as thev may; in a word, all manner of devotion in 
those that would serve God without Christ the Mediator, his 
Word and command. In Popedom it was held a work of the 
greatest sanctity for the monks to sit in their cells and medi- 



OF IDOLATRY. 69 

tate of God, and of his wonderful works; to be kindled with 
zeal, kneeling on their knees, praying, and having their ima- 
ginary contemplations of celestial objects, with such supposed 
devotion, that they wept for joy. In these their conceits, 
they banished all desires and thoughts of women, and what 
else is temporal and evanescent. They seemed to meditate 
only of God, and of his wonderful works. Yet all these 
seeming holy actions of devotion, which the wit and wisdom 
of man holds to be angelical sanctity, are nothing else but 
works of the flesh. All manner of religion, where people 
serve God without his Word and command, is simply idolatry, 
and the more holy and spiritual such a religion seems, the 
more hurtful and venomous it is; for it leads people away 
from the faith of Christ, and makes them rely and depend 
upon their own strength, works, and righteousness. 

In like manner, all kinds of orders of monks, fasts, prayers, 
hairy shirts, the austerities of the Capuchins, who in Pope- 
dom are held to be the most holy of all, are mere works of the 
flesh ; for the monks hold they are holy, and shall be saved, not 
through Christ, whom they view as a severe and angry judge, 
but through the rules of their order. 

No man can make the papists believe that the private mass 
is the greatest blaspheming of God, and the highest idolatry 
upon earth, an abomination the like to which has never been 
in Christendom since the time of the apostles; for they are 
blinded and hardened therein, so that their understanding 
and knowledge of God, and of all divine matters, is perverted 
and erroneous. They hold that to be the most upright and 
greatest service of God, which, in truth, is the greatest and 
most abominable idolatry. And agam, they hold that for 
idolatry, which, in truth, is the upright and most acceptable 
service of God, the acknowledging Christ, and believing in 
him. But we that truly believe in Christ, and are of his 
mind, we, God be praised, know and judge all things, but 
are judged of no human creature. 

CLXXIT. 

Dr. Carlstad asked me: Should a man, out of good in- 
tention, erect a pious work without God's word or command, 
does he herein serve a true or a strange God? Luther 
ans\Vered: A man honours Gcd and calls upon him, to the 



70 Luther's table-talk. 

end he may expect comfort, help, and all good from him. 
Now if this same honour and calling upon God be done ac- 
cording to God's Word — that is, when a man expects from 
him all graces for the sake of his promises made unto us in 
Christ, then he honours the true, living, and everlasting God. 
But if a man take in hand a work or a service, out of his own 
devotion, as he thinks good, thereby to appease God's anger, 
or to attain forgiveness of sins, everlasting life, and salvation, 
as is the manner of all hypocrites and seeming holy workers, 
then, I say flatly, he honours and worships an idol in hia 
heart: and it helps him nothing at all, that he thinks he does 
it to the honour of the true God; for that which is not of 
faith is sin. 

CLX-XIII. 

Hypocrites and idolaters are of the same quality with 
singers, who will scarce sing when asked to do so, but, when 
not desired, begin, and never leave off. Even so with the 
false workers of holiness ; when God orders them to obey his 
commands, which are to love one's neighbour, to help him 
with advice, with lending, giving, admonishing, comforting, 
&c., no man can bring them to this; but, on the contrary, they 
stick to that which they themselves make choice of, pretend- 
ing that this is the best way to honour and serve God — a 
great delusion of theirs. They plague and torment their 
bodies with fasting, praying, singing, reading, hard lying, 
&c. ; they affect great humility and holiness, and do all these 
things with vast zeal, fervency, and incessant devotion. But 
such as the service and work is, such will also the reward 
be, as Christ himself says: "In vain do they worship me, 
teaching for doctrine the commandments of men." 

CLXXIV. 

The idolatry of Moloch had, I apprehend, a great show, as 
though it were a worship more acceptable and pleasing to 
God than the common service commanded by Moses; hence 
many people who, in outward show, were of devout holiness, 
when they intended to perform an acceptable service and 
honour to God, as they imagined, offered up and sacrificed 
their sons and daughters, thinking, no doubt, that herein they 
were following the example of Abraham, and doing an act 
very acceptable and pleasing to God. 



OF IDOLATRY. 7l 

Against this idolatry God's prophets preached with burn- 
ing zeal, calling it, not offerings to God, but to idols and 
devils, as the 106th Psalra shows, and Jeremiah, chap. vii. 
and xxiii. But they held the prophets to be impostors and 
accursed heretics. 

This worshipping of idols was very frequent in Popedom, 
in my time and still, though in another manner; the papists 
in Popedom being esteemed holy people that give one or 
more of their children to the monasteries, to become either 
monks or nuns, that so they may serve God, as they say, 
day and night. Hence the proverb: Blessed the mother of 
the child that is made a spiritual person! True, these sons 
and daughters in Popedom are not burned and offered to 
idols corporally, as were the Jewish children, yet, which is 
fai' worse, they are thrust into the throat of the devil spi- 
ritually, who, through his disciples, the pope and his shaven 
crew, lamentably murders their souls with false doctrines. 

The Holy Scripture often mentions Moloch, as does Lyra; 
and the commentaries of the Jews say, it was an idol made 
of copper and brass, like a man holding his hands before him, 
wherein they put fiery coals. When the image was made very 
hot, a father approached, and offering to the idol, took his 
child, and thrust it into the glittering hands of the idol, 
whereby the child was consumed and burned to death. Mean- 
time, they made a loud noise with timbrels, and cymbals, and 
horns, to the end the parents should not hear the pitiful cry- 
ing of the child. The prophets write, that Ahab offered his 
eon in this manner. 

CLXXV. 

The calves of Jeroboam still remain in the world, and will 
remain to the last day; not that any man now makes calves 
like Jeroboam's, but upon whatsoever a man depends or 
trusts — God set aside — this is the calves of Jeroboam, that is, 
other and strange gods, honoured and worshipped instead of 
the only, true, living, and eternal God, who only can and will 
help and comfort in all need. In like manner also, all such 
as rely and depend upon their art, wisdom, strength, sanctity, 
riches, honour, power, or anything else, under what title or 
name soever, on which the world builds, make and worship 
the calves of Jeroboam. For they trust in and depend on 
vanishing creatures, which is worshipping of idols and idol- 



72 LUTHER S TABLE-TALK. 

atry. We easily fall into idolatry, for we are inclined tnere- 
unto by nature, and coming to us by inheritance, it seems 
pleasant. 

CLXXVI. 

St. Paul stows in these words: "When ye knew not God, 
ye did service," &c., that is, when as yet ye knew not God or 
what God's will was towards you, ye served those who by 
nature were no gods; ye served the dreams and thoughts of 
your hearts, wherewith, against God's Word, ye feigned to 
yourselves a God that suffered himself to be conciliated with 
such works and worshippings as your devotion and good in- 
tention made choice of. For all idolatry in the world arises 
from this, that people by nature have had the common know- 
ledge, that there is a God, without which idolatry would 
remain unpractised. With this kuow^ledge engrafted in man- 
kind, they have, without God's Word, fancied all manner of 
ungodly opinions of God, and held and esteemed these for 
divine truths, imagining a God otherwise than, by nature, 
he is. 

CLXXVII. 

He that goes from the gospel to the law, thinking to be 
saved by good works, falls as uneasily, as he who falls from 
the true service of God to idolatry; for, without Christ, all is 
idolatry and fictitious imaginings of God, whether of the 
Turkish Koran, of the pope's decrees, or Moses' laws; if a 
man think thereby to be justified and saved before God, he is 
undone. 

When a man will serve God, he must not look upon that 
which he does; not upon the work, but how it ought to be 
done, and whether God has commanded it or no; seeing, as 
Samuel says, that " God hath more pleasure in obedience, than 
in burnt sacrifice." 

Whoso hearkens not to God's voice, is an idolater, though 
he perform the highest and most heavy service of God. 'Tis 
the very nature of idolatry not to make choice of that w^hich 
is esteemed easy and light, but of that which is great and 
heavy, as we see in the friars and monks , who have been 
constantly devising new worshippings of God; but, for- 
asmuch that God in his Word has not commanded these, 
they are idolatry, and blasphemy. All these sins, they 



OF IDOLATRY. 73 

who are in the function of preaching ought undauntedly 
and freely to reprove, not regarding men's high dignities 
and powers. For the prophets, as we see in Hosea, reproved 
and threatened not only the house of Israel in general, 
but also, in particular, the priests, ay, the king himself, and 
the whole court. They cared not for the great danger that 
might follow from the magistrate being so openly assailed, or 
that themselves thereby should fall into displeasure and con- 
tempt, and their preaching be esteemed rebellious. They 
were impelled by the far greater danger, lest by such exam- 
ples of the higher powers, the subjects also should be seduced 
into sin. 

CLXXVIII. 

The papists took the invocation of saints from the heathen, 
who divided God into numberless images and idols, and or- 
dained to each its particular office and work. 

These the papists, void of all shame and Christianity, 
imitated, thereby denying God's almighty power; every man, 
out of God's AVord, spinning to himself a particular opinion, 
according to his own fancy; as one of their priests, celebrating 
mass, when about to consecrate many oblations at the altar 
at once, thought it would not be congruously spoken, or ac- 
cording to grammar rules, to say, " This is my body," so said, 
" These are my bodies;" and afterwards highly extolled his 
device, saying: ''If I had not been so good a grammarian, I 
had brought in a heresy, and consecrated but one oblation." 

Such like fellows does the world produce; grammarians, 
logicians, rhetoricians, and philosophers, all falsifying the 
Holy Writ, and sophisticating it with their arts, whereas, it 
ought to remain, every point in its own place, whereto God 
ordered and appointed it. Divinity should be empress, and 
philosophy and other arts merely her servants, not to govern 
and master her, as Servetus, Campanus, and other- seducers 
would do. God preserve his church, which by him is carried 
a3 a child in the mother's womb, and defend her from such 
philosophical divinity. 

The invocation of saints it3 a most abominable blindness 
and heresy; yet the papists will not give it up. The pope's 
greatest profit arises from the dead; for the calling on dead 
saints brings him infinite sums of money and riches, far more 
than he gets from the living. But thus goes the world; super- 



74 Luther's table-talk. 

stition, unbelief, false doctrine, idolatry, obtain more credit 
and profit than tbe upright, true, and pure religion. 

CLXXIX. 

God and God's worship are relatives; the one cannot be 
without the other; for God must always be the God of some 
people or nation, and is always in predicamento relationis, 
God will have some to call upon him and honour him; for, 
to have a God and to honour him, go together. Therefore, 
whoso brings in a divine worship of his own selection, without 
God's command, is an adulterer, like a married woman who 
consents to another man, seeking another and not the upright 
true God, and it avails him nothing that he thinks he does 
God service herein. 

CLXXX. 

In all creatures are a declaration and a signification of the 
Holy Trinity. First, the substance signifies the almighty 
power of God the Father. Secondly, the form and shape 
declare the wisdom of God the Son; and, thirdly, the power 
and strength is a sign of the Holy Ghost. So that God is 
present in all creatures. 

CLXXXI. 

In the gospel of St. John, chap, iii., is plainly and directly 
shown the difference of the persons, in the highest and 
greatest work that God accomplished for us poor human 
creatures, in justifying and saving us; for there it is plainly 
written of the Father, that he loved the w^orld, and gave to 
the world his only begotten Son. These are two several 
persons — Father, and Son. The Father loves the world; and 
gives unto it his Son. The Son suffers himself to be given 
to the world, and "to be lifted up on the cross, as the serpent 
was lifted up in the wilderness, that whosoever believed in 
him shall not perish, but have everlasting life." To this work 
comes afterwards the third person, the Holy Ghost, who 
kindles faith in the heart through the Word, and so regene- 
rates us, and makes us the children of God. 

This article, though it be taught most clearly in the New 
Testament, yet has been always assaulted and opposed in the 
highest measure, so that the holy evangelist, St. John, for 
the confirmation of this article, was constrained to write hi3 



OF IDOLATRY. 75 

gospel. Then came presently that heretic, Cerinthus, teach- 
ing out of Moses, that there was but one God, and concluding 
thence that Christ could not be God, or God man. 

But let us stick to God's Word in the Holy Scripture, 
namely, that Christ is true God with God the Father, and 
that the Holy Ghost is true God, and yet there are not three 
Gods, nor three substances, as three men, three angels, three 
sons, three windows, &c. No: God is not separated or 
divided in such manner in his substance, but there is only and 
alone one divine essence, and no more. 

Therefore, although there be three persons, God the 
Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, yet not- 
withstanding, we must not divide or separate the substance: 
for there is but only one God, in one only undivided sub- 
stance, as St. Paul clearly speaks of Christ, Colos. i., that he 
is the express image of the invisible God, the first-born of all 
creatures; for through him all things are created that are in 
heaven and on earth, visible, &c., and all is through and in 
him created, and he is before all, and all things consist in 
him. 

Now what the third person is, the holy evangelist, St. John, 
teaches, chap, xv., where he says: "But when the Comforter 
is come, which I will send unto you from the Father, the 
Spirit of truth which proceeds from the Father, he shall 
testify of me." Here Christ speaks not only of the office and 
work of the Holy Ghost, but also of his substance and faith: 
he goes out or proceeds from the Father, that is, his going 
out, or his proceeding, is without all beginning, and everlast- 
ing. Therefore the holy prophet Joel gives him the name, 
and calls him, " the Spirit of the Lord." 

Now, although this article seem strange or foolish, what 
matters it? 'tis not the question whether it be so or no, but 
whether it be grounded on God's Word, or no. If it be 
God's word, as most surely it is, then let us make no doubt 
thereof; He will not lie; therefore, let us keep close to God's 
Word, and not dispute how Father, Son, and Holy Ghost can 
be one God ; for we, as poor wretches, cannot know how it is 
that we laugh; or how with our eyes, we can see a high 
mountain ten miles oiF; or how it is, that when we sleep, in 
body we are dead, and yet live. This small knowledge we can- 
not attain unto; no, though we took to our help the advice 



76 Luther's table-talk. 

and art of all the wise in the world, we are not able to know 
the least things which concern ourselves; and yet we would 
climb up with our human wit and wisdom, and presume to 
comprehend what God is in his incomprehensible majesty. 



OF JESUS CHRIST. 

CLXXXII. 

The chief lesson and study in divinity is, that we learn 
well and rightly to know Christ, who is therein very graciously 
pictured forth unto us. We take pains to conciliate the good 
will and friendship of men, that so they may show us a favour- 
able countenance; how much the more ought we to conciliate 
our Lord Jesus, that so he may be gracious unto us. St. 
Peter says: "Grow up in the knowledge of Jesus Christ," of 
that compassionate Lord and Master, whom all should cleave 
unto. Christ himself also teaches, that we should learn to 
know him only out of the Scriptures, where he says : 
" Search the Scriptures; for they do testify of me." St. John 
says: " In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was 
with God, and the Word was God," &c. The apostle Thomas 
also calls Christ, God; where he says: "My Lord, and my 
God." In like manner, St. Paul, Rom. ix., speaks of Christ, 
that he is God ; where he says : " Who is God over all, 
blessed for ever. Amen." And Colos. ii., " In Christ dwelleth 
all the fulness of the Godhead bodily;" that is, substantially. 
Christ mUvSt needs be true God, seeing he, through himself, 
fulfilled and overcame the law; for most certain it is, that no 
one else could have vanquished the law, angel or human 
creature, but Christ only, so that it cannot hurt those that 
believe in him; therefore, most certainly he is the Son of 
God, and natural God. Now if we comprehend Christ in 
this manner, as the Holy Scripture displays him before us, 
then certain it is, that we can neither err nor be put to con- 
fusion; and may then easily judge what is right to be held of 
all manner of divine qualities, religions, and worship, that are 
used and practised in the universal world. Were this pictur- 



OF JESUS CHRIST. 77 

ing of Christ removed out of our siglit, or darkened in us, 
undeniably there must needs follow utter disorder. For 
human and natural religion, wisdom, and understanding, can- 
not judge aright or truly of the laws of God; therein has 
been and still is exhausted the art of all philosophers, of all 
the learned and worldly-wise among the children of men. 
For the law rules and governs mankind ; therefore the law 
judges mankind, and not mankind the law. 

If Christ be not God, then neither the Father nor the Holy 
Ghost is God; for our article of faith speaks thus : " Christ 
is God, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost." Many there 
are who talk much of the Godhead of Christ, as the pope, 
and others; but they discourse thereof as a blind man speaks 
of colours. Therefore, when I hear Christ speak, and say : 
•' Come to me, all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I 
will give you rest," then do I believe steadfastly that the whole 
Godhead speaks in an undivided and unseparate substance. 
Wherefore, he that preaches a God to me that died not for me 
the death on the cross, that God will I not receive. 

He that has this article, has the chief and principal article 
of faith, though to the world it seem unmeaning and even 
ridiculous. Christ says: The Comforter which I will send, 
shall not depart from you, but will remain with you, and will 
make you able to endure all manner of tribulations and evil. 
When Christ says: I will pray to the Father, then he speaks as 
a human creature, or as very man; but when he says : I will 
do this or that, as before he said, I will send the Comforter, 
then he speaks as very God. In this manner do I learn my 
article, " That Christ is both God and man. 

I, out of my own experience, am able to witness, that 
Jesus Christ is true God; I know full well and have found 
what the name of Jesus has done for me. I have often been 
so near death, that I thought verily now must I die, because I 
teach his Word to the wicked world, and acknowledge him; 
but always he mercifully put life into me, refreshed and com- 
forted me. Therefore, let us use diligence only to keep him, 
and then all is safe, although the devil were ever so wicked 
and crafty, and the world ever so evil and false. Let what- 
soever will or can befal me, I will surely cleave by my sweet 
Saviour Christ Jesus, for in him am T baptized; I can neither 
do nor know anything but only what he has taught me. 



78 Luther's table-talk. 

The Holy Scriptures, especially St. Paul, everywhere 
ascribe unto Christ that which he gives to the Father, 
namely, the divine almighty power; so that he can give grace, 
and peace of conscience, forgiveness of sins, life, victory over 
sin, and death, and the devil. Now, unless St. Paul would rob 
God of his honour, and give it to another that is not God, he 
dared not ascribe such properties and attributes to Christ, if 
he were not true God; and God himself says, Isa. xlii., " I 
will not give my glory to another." And, indeed, no man 
can give that to another which he has not himself; but, see- 
ing Christ gives grace and peace, the Holy Ghost also, and 
redeems from the power of the devil, sin and death, so is it 
most sure that he has an endless, immeasurable, almighty 
power, equal with the Father. 

Christ brings also peace, but not as the apostles brought it, 
through preaching; he gives it as a Creator, as his own proper 
creature. The Father creates and gives life, grace, and peace; 
and even so gives the Son the same gifts. Now, to give 
grace, peace, everlasting life, forgiveness of sins, to justify, 
to save, to deliver from death and hell, surely these are not 
the works of any creature, but of the sole majesty of God, 
things which the angels themselves can neither create nor 
give. Therefore, such works pertain to the high majesty, 
honour, and glory of God, who is the only and true Creator 
of all things. We must think of no other God than Christ; 
that God which speaks not out of Christ's mouth, is not God. 
God, in the Old Testament, bound himself to the throne of 
grace; there was the place where he would hear, so long as 
the policy and government of Moses stood and flourished. In 
like manner, he will still hear no man or human creature, but 
only through Christ. As numbers of the Jews ran to and 
fro burning incense, and offerings here and there, and seeking 
God in various places, not regarding the tabernacle, so it goes 
now ; we seek God everywhere ; but not seeking him in 
Christ, we find him nowhere. 

CLXXXIII. 

The feast we call Annunciatio Marice, when the angel 
came to Mary, and brought her the message from God, that 
she should conceive his Son, may be fitly called the " Feast 
of Christ's Humanity;" for then began our deliverance. The 



OP JESUS CHRIST. 79 

mystery of the humanity of Christ, that he sunk himself into 
our flesh, is beyond all human understanding. 

CLXXXIV. 

Christ lived three and thirty years, and went up thrice 
every year to Jerusalem, making ninety-nine times he went 
thither. If the pope could show that Christ had been but 
once at Rome, what a bragging and boasting would he make! 
yet Jerusalem was destroyed to the ground. 

CLXXXV. 

St. Paul teaches, that Christ was born, to the end he might 
restore and bring everything to the state in which it was 
created at the beginning of the world; that is, to bring us to 
the knowledge of ourselves and our Creator, that we might 
learn to know who and what we have been, and who and what 
we now are; namely, that we were created after God's like- 
ness, and afterwards, according to the likeness of man; that 
we were the devil's vizard through sin, utterly lost and de- 
stroyed; and that now we may be delivered from sin again, 
and become pure, justified, and saved. 

CLXXXVI. 

On the day of the conception of our Saviour Christ, we 
that are preachers ought diligently to lay before the people, 
and thoroughly imprint in their hearts, the history of this 
feast, which is given by St. Luke in plain and simple language. 
And we should joy and delight in these blessed things, more 
than in all the treasure on earth, disputing not how it came 
to pass, that he, who fills heaven and earth, and whom neither 
heaven nor earth is able to comprehend, was inclosed in the 
pure body of his mother. Such disputations impede our joys, 
and give us occasion to doubt. 

Bernard occupies a whole sermon upon this feast, in laud 
of the Virgin Mary, forgetting the great author of comfort, 
that this day God was made man. True, we cannot but 
extol and praise Mary, who was so highly favoured of the 
Lord, but when the Creator himself comes, Avho delivers us 
from the devil's power, &c., him, neither we nor angels can 
sufficiently honour, praise, worship, and adore. 

The Turk himself, who believes there is only one God, 
who has created all things, permits Christ to remain a prophet, 



80 luther's table-talk. 

thougli he denies that he is the only begotten, true, and 
natural Son of God. 

But I, God be praised, have learned out of the Holy Scrip- 
ture, and by experience in my trials, temptations, and fierce 
combats against the devil, that this article of Christ's humanity 
is most sure and certain; for nothing has more or better 
helped me in high spiritual temptations, than my comfort in 
this, that Christ, the true everlasting Son of God, is our flesh 
and bone, as St. Paul says to the Ephesians, chap, v.: "We 
are members of his body, of his flesh and bone; he sitteth at 
the right hand of God, and maketh intercession for us." 
When I take hold on this shield of faith, then I soon drive 
away that wicked one, with all his fiery darts. 

God, from the beginning, has held fast to this article, and 
powerfully defended the same against all heretics, the pope, and 
the Turk; and afterwards confirmed it with many miraculous 
signs, so that all who have opposed the same at last have been 
brought to confusion. 

CLXXXVII. 

All the wisdom of the world is childish foolishness in com- 
parison with the acknowledgment of Christ. For what is more 
wonderful than the unspeakable mystery, that the Son of 
God, the image of the eternal Father, took upon him the 
nature of man. Doubtless, he helped his supposed father, 
Joseph, to build houses; for Joseph was a carpenter. What 
will they of Nazareth think at the day of judgment, when 
they shall see Christ sitting in his divine majesty; surely 
they will be astonished, and say: Lord, thou helpest build my 
house, how comest thou now to this high honour? 

When Jesus was born, doubtless, he cried and wept like 
other children, and liis mother tended him as other mothers 
tend their children. As he grew up, he was submissive to 
his parents, and waited on them, and carried his supposed 
father's dinner to him, and when he came back, Mary, no 
doubt, often said: " My dear little Jesus, where hast thou 
been?" He that takes not offence at the simple, lowly, and 
mean course of the life of Christ, is endued with high divine 
art and wisdom; yea, has a special gift of God in the Holy 
Ghost. Let us ever bear in mind, that our blessed Saviour 
thus humbled and abased himself, yielding even to the con- 



OF JESUS <;hrist. 81 

tumelious death of the cross, for the comfort of ms poor 
miserable, and damned creatures. 

CLXXXVIII. 

If the emperor should wash a beggar's feet, ad the FrencK 
king used to do on Maunday Thursday, and the emperor 
Charles yearly, how would such humility be extolled and 
praised ! But though the Son of God, Lord of all emperors, 
kings, and princes, in the deepest measure humbled himself, 
even to the death of the cross, yet no man wcnders thereat, 
except only the small heap of the faithful who acknowledge 
and worship him as their only Lord and Saviour. He abased 
himself, indeed, enough, when he was held to be the man 
most despised, plagued, and smitten of God, (Isaiah liii.,) and 
for our sakes underwent and suffered shame. 

CLXXXIX. 

We cannot vex the devil more than by teaching, preach- 
ing, singing, and talking of Jesus. Therefore I like it well, 
when with sounding voice we sing in the church: Et homo 
factus est; et verbum caro factum est. The devil cannot 
endure these words, and flies away, for he well feels what is 
contained therein. Oh, how happy a thing were it, did we 
find as much joy in these words as the devil is affrighted at 
them. But the world contemns God's words and works, be- 
cause they are deHvered to them in a plain and simple manner. 
Well, the good and godly are not offended therewith, for 
they have regard to the everlasting celestial treasure and 
wealth which therein lies hid, and which is so precious and 
glorious, that the angels delight in beholding it. Some there 
are who take offence, that now and then in the pulpits we 
say: Christ was a carpenter's son, and as a blasphemer and 
rebel, he was put on the cross, and hanged between two 
malefactors. 

But seeing we preach continually of this article, and in 
our children's creed, say: That our Saviour Christ suffered 
under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried, ho,. 
for our sins, why, then, should we not say Christ was a car- 
penter's son? especially seeing that he is clearly so named in 
the gospel, when the people wondered at his doctrine and 
wisdom, and said: How cometh this to pass? Is not thidi 
the carpenter, the son of Mary? (Mark, vi.) 



82 Luther's table-talk. 

cxc. 

Christ, our High-priest, is ascended into heaven, and sita 
on the right hand of God the Father, where, without ceasing, 
he makes intercession for us, (see Romans, viii.) where St. 
Paul, with very excellent, glorious words, pictures Christ to 
us; as in his death, he is a sacrifice offered up for sins; in his 
resurrection, a conqueror; in his ascension, a king; in making 
mediation and intercession, a high-priest. For, in the law 
of Moses, the high-uriest only went into the Most Holiest to 
pray for the people. 

Christ will remain a priest and king, though he was never 
consecrated by any papist bishop or greased by any of those 
shavelings; but he was ordained and consecrated by God him- 
self, and by him anointed, where he says: " Thou art a priest 
for ever." Here the word Thou is bigger than the stone in 
the Revelations of John, which was longer than three hundred 
leagues. And the second psalm says: " I have set my King 
upon my holy hill of Sion." Therefore he will sure remain 
sitting, and all that believe in him. 

God says: " Thou art a priest for ever, after the order of 
Melchizedeck." Therefore let us depend on this priest, for 
he is faithful and true, given unto us of God, and loving us 
more than his own life, as he showed by his bitter passion 
and death. Ah! how happy and blessed were the man that 
could believe this from his heart. 

" The Lord sware and will not repent, thou art a priest." 
This is the most glorious sentence in the whole psalms, where 
God declares unto us, that this Christ shall be our bishop 
and high-priest, who, without ceasing, shall make intercession 
for those that are his, and none other besides him. It shall 
be neither Caiaphas, nor Annas, Peter, Paul, nor the pope, 
but Christ, only Christ; therefore let us take our refuge in 
him. The epistle to the Hebrews makes good use of this 
verse. 

It is, indeed, a great and a glorious comfort (which every 
good and godly Christian would not miss, or be without, for 
all the honour and wealth in the world) that we know and 
believe that Christ, our high-priest, sits on the right hand of 
God, praying and mediating for us without ceasing — the true 
pastor and bishop of our souls, which the devil cannot tear 
out of his hands. 



OF JESUS CHRIST. 83 

But then what a crafty and mighty spirit the devil must 
be, who can affriirlit, and with his fiery darts draw the hearts 
of good and godly people from this excelling comfort, and 
make them entertain other cogitations of Christ; that he is 
not their high-priest, but complains of them to God; that 
he is not the bishop of their souls, but a stern and an angry 
judge. The Lord said to Christ: " Rule in the midst of thine 
enemies." On the other hand, the devil claims to be prince 
and God of the world. He is, therefore, the sworn enemy of 
Jesus Christ and of his Word, and of those who follow that 
Word, sincerely and without guile. 'Tis impossible for Jesus 
Christ and the devil ever to remain under the same roof. 
The one must yield to the oth^r — the devil to Christ. The 
Jews and the Apostles were for awhile under the same roof, 
and the Jews plagued and persecuted the Apostles and their 
follow^ers, but after awhile were themselves thrust out by the 
Romans. As little can the Lutherans and the papists hold 
together. One party must yield, and by the blessing and aid 
of God, this will be the papists. 

cxci. 

Sheh limini; that is, " Sit thou on my right hand." This 
Sheb limini has many and great enemies, whom we poor, 
small heap must endure; but 'tis no matter; many of us must 
suffer and be slain by their fury and rage, yet let us not be 
dismayed, but, with a divine resolution and courage, wage 
and venture ourselves, our bodies and souls, upon this his 
word and promise: " I live, and ye shall also live; and where 
I am, there shall ye be also." 

Christ bears himself as though he took not the part of us his 
poor, troubled, persecuted members. For the world rewards 
God's best and truest servants very ill; persecuting, con- 
demning, and killing them as heretics and malefactors, while 
Christ holds his peace and suffers it to be done, so that some- 
times I have this thought: I know not where I am; whether I 
preach right or no. This was also the temptation and trial 
of St. Paul, touching which he, however, spake not much, 
neither could, as I think; for who can tell w^hat those w^ords 
import: " I die daily." 

The Scripture, in many places, calls Christ our priest, 
bridegroom, love's delight, &c., and us who believe in him, 
g2 



84 luthek's table-talk. 

his bride, virgin, daughter, &c. ; this is a fair, sweet, loving 
picture, which we always should have before our eyes. For, 
first, he has manifested his office of priesthood in this, that 
he has preached, made known, and revealed his Father's will 
unto us. Secondly, he has also prayed, and will pray for us 
true Christians so long as the world endures. Thirdly, he 
has offered up his body for our sins upon the cross. He is our 
bridegroom, and we are his bride. What he, the loving 
Saviour Christ has — yea himself, is ours; for we are members 
of his body, of his flesh and bone, as St. Paul says. And 
again, what we have, the same is also his; but the exchange 
is exceeding unequal; for he has everlasting innocence, 
righteousness, life, and salvation, which he gives to be our 
own, while what we have is sin, death, damnation, and hell; 
these we give unto him, for he has taken our sins upon him, 
has delivered us from the power of the devil and crushed his 
head, taken him prisoner, and cast him down to hell; so that 
now we may, with St. Paul, undauntedly say : " Death, 
where is thy sting?" Yet, though our loving Saviour has 
solemnized this spiritual wedding with us, and endued us 
with his eternal, celestial treasure, and sworn to be our ever- 
lasting priest, yet the majority, in the devil's name, run away 
from him, and worship strange idols, as the Jews did, and 
as they in popedom do. 

CXCII. 

" There is but one God," says St. Paul, " and one mediator 
between God and man; namely, the man Jesus Christ, who 
gave himself a ransom for all." Therefore, let no man think 
to draw near unto God or obtain grace of him, without this 
mediator, hi^h-priest, and advocate. 

it follows that we cannot through our good works, honesty 
of life, virtues, deserts, sanctity, or through the works of the 
law, appease God's wrath, or obtain forgiveness of sins; and 
that all deserts of saints are quite rejected and condemned, 
so that through them no human creature can be justified 
before God. Moreover, we see how fierce God's anger is 
against sins, seeing that by none other sacrifice or offering 
could they be a43peased and stilled, but by the precious blood 
of the Son of God. 



OF JESUS CHRIST. 85 

CXCIII. 

All lieretics have set themselves against Christ. ManicIieiiN 
opposed Christ's humanity, for he alleged, Christ was a spirit; 
"Even," says he, " as the sun shines through a painted glass, 
and the sunbeams go through on the other side, and yet the 
sun takes nothing away from the substance of the glass, even 
so Christ took nothing from the substance and nature of 
Ivlary." Arius assaulted the godhead of Christ. Nestorius 
held there were two persons. Eutychius taught there was but 
one person; "for," said he, "the person of the Deity was 
swallowed up." Helvidius affirmed, the mother of Christ was 
not a virgin, so that, according to his wicked allegation, 
Christ was born in original sin. Macedonius opposed only 
the article of the Holy Ghost, but he soon fell, and was con- 
founded. If this article of Christ remain, then all blasphemous 
ppirits must vanish and be overthrown. The Turks and 
Jews acknowledge God the Father; it is the Son they shoot 
at. About this article much blood has been shed. I verily 
believe that at Rome more than twenty hundred thousands of 
martyrs have been put to death. It began with the beginning 
of the w^orld — with Cain and Abel, Ishmael and Isaac, Esau 
and Jacob, and I am persuaded that 'twas about it the devil 
w^as cast from heaven down to hell; he was a fair creature of 
God, and, doubtless, strove to be the Son. 

Next, after the Holy Scripture, we have no stronger argu- 
ment for the confirmation of that article, than the sweet and 
loving cross For all kingdoms, all the powerful, have striven 
against Christ and this article, but they could not prevail. 



At Rome was a church called Pantheon, where were col- 
lected effigies of all the gods they were able to bring together 
out of the whole world. All these could well accord one with 
another, for the devil therewith jeered the world, laughing in 
his fist; but when Christ came, him they could not endure, 
but all the devils, idols, and heretics grew stark mad and 
full of rage; for he, the right and true God and man, threw 
tliem altogether on a heap. The pope also sets himself power- 
fully against Christ, but he must likewise be put to confusion 
ajid destroyed. 



86 Luther's table-talk. 

cxcv. 

The history of the resurrection of Christ, teaching that 
which human wit and wisdom of itself cannot believe, that 
'' Christ is risen from the dead," was declared to the weaker 
and sillier creatures, women, and such as were perplexed and 
troubled. 

Silly, indeed, before God, and before the world: Sr.-'t, 
before God, in that they " sought the living among the 
dead;" second, before the world, for they forgot the "great 
stone which lay at the mouth of the sepulchre," and prepared 
spices to anoint Christ, which was all in vain. But spiritually 
is hereby signified this: if the " great stone," namely, the 
law and human traditions, whereby the consciences are 
bound and snared, be not rolled away from the heart, then 
we cannot find Christ, or believe that he is risen from the 
dead. For through him we are delivered from the power of 
sin and death, Rom. viii., so that the hand-writing of the con- 
science, can hurt us no more. 

CXCVI. 

Is it not a wonder beyond all wonders, that the Son of 
God, whom all angels and the heavenly hosts worship, and at 
whose presence the whole earth quakes and trembles, should 
have stood among those wicked wretches, and suffered himself 
to be so lamentably tormented, scorned, derided, and con- 
temned? They spat in his face, struck him in the mouth with 
a reed, and said: O, he is a king, he must have a crown and a 
sceptio. The sweet blessed Saviour complains not in vain in 
the Psalm, Diminuerunt omnia ossa mea : now, if he sufi^ered 
so much from the rage of men, what must he have felt when 
God's wrath was poured out upon him without measure? as 
St. Mark says: " He began to be sore amazed, and very 
heavy, and saith unto his disciples. My soul is exceeding 
sorrowful unto death:" and St. Luke says: "And being in an 
agony, he prayed more earnestly, and his sweat was as it were 
great drops of blood falling down to the ground." Ah! our 
suffering is not worthy the name of suffering. When I con- 
sider my crosses, tribulations, and temptations, I shame myself 
almost to death, thinking what are they in comparison of the 
sufferings of my blessed Saviour Christ Jesus. And yet we 
must be conformable to the express image of the Son of God. 



OF JESUS CHRIST. 87 

And what if we were conformable to the same, yet were it 
nothing. He is the Son of God, we are poor creatures; 
though we should suffer everlasting death, yet were they of 
no value. 

CXCVII. 

The wrath is fierce and devouring which the devil has 
against the Son of God, and against mankind. I beheld once 
a wolf tearing sheep. When the wolf comes into a sheep- 
fold, he eats not any until he has killed all, and then he 
begins to eat, thinking to devour all. Even so it is also 
with the devil; I have now, thinks he, taken hold on Christ, 
and in time I will also snap his disciples. But the devil's 
folly is that he sees not he has to do with the Son of God; 
he knows not that in the end it will be his bane. It will 
come to that pass, that the devil must be afraid of a child in 
the cradle; for when he but hears the name Jesus, uttered in 
true faith, then he cannot stay. The devil would rather run 
through the fire, than stay where Christ is; therefore, it is 
justly said, The seed of the woman shall crush the serpent'^ 
head. I believe, indeed, he has so crushed his head, that he 
can neither abide to hear or see Christ Jesus. I often delight 
myself with that similitude in Job, of an angle-hook that 
fishermen cast into the water, putting on the hook a little 
worm; then comes the fish and snatches at the w^orm, and 
gets therewith the hook in his jaws, and the fisher pulls him 
out of the water. Even so has our Lord God dealt with the 
devil; God has cast into the w^orld his only Son, as the angle, 
and upon the hook has put Christ's humanity, as the worm; 
then comes the devil and snaps at the (man) Christ, and de- 
vours him, and therewith he bites the iron hook, that is, the 
godhead of Christ, which chokes him, and all his po-wer 
thereby is thrown to the ground. This is called sapientia, 
divina, divine wisdom. 

cxcvm. 
The conversation of Christ with his disciples, when he 
took his leave of them at his last supper, was most sweet, 
loving, and friendly, talking with them lovingly, as a father 
with his children, when he must depart from them. He took 
their weakness in good part, and bore with them, though 
now and then their discourse w^as very full of simplicity; a8 



83 LUTHER'S TABLE-TALK. 

when Philip said : " Show us the Father," &c. And 
Thomas: " We know not the way," &c. And Peter: " I 
will go with thee into death." Each freely showing the 
thoughts of his heart. Never, since the world began, was ii 
more precious, sweet, and amiable conversation. 

cxcix. 
Christ had neither money, nor riches, nor earthly kingdom, 
for he gave the same to kings and princes. But he reserved 
one thing peculiarly to himself, which no human creature or 
angel could do — namely, to conquer sin and death, the devil 
and hell, and in the midst of death to deliver and save those 
that through his word believe in him. 

cc. 
The sweating of blood and other high spiritual suiFerings 
that Christ endured in the garden, no human creature can 
know or imagine; if one of us should but begin to feel 
the least of those sufferings, he must die instantly. There 
are many who die of grief of mind; for sorrow of heart is 
death itself. If a man should feel such anguish and pain as 
Christ had, it were impossible for the soul to remain in the 
body and endure it — body and soul must part asunder. In 
Christ only it was possible, and from him issued bloody 
sweat. 

CCI. 

Nothing is more sure than this: he that does not take hold 
on Christ by faith, and comfort himself herein, that Christ is 
made a curse for him, remains under the curse. The more 
we labour by works to obtain grace, the less we know now 
to take hold on Christ; for where he is not known and com- 
prehended by faith, there is not to be expected either advice, 
help, or comfort, though we torment ourselves to death,. 

ecu. 
All the prophets well foresaw in the Spirit, that Christ, 
by imputation, would become the greatest sinner upon ti.-*, 
face of the earth, and a sacrifice for the sins of the whole 
world; would be no more considered an innocent person and 
without sin, or the Son of God in glory, but a notorious 
sinner, and so be for awhile forsaken (Psal. viii.), and have 
lying upon his neck the sins of all mankind; the sins of St. 



OF JESUS CHRIST. 89 

Paul, who was a blasphemer of God, and a persecutor of his 
church; St. Peter's sins, that denied Christ; David's sins, 
who was an adulterer and a murderer, through whom the 
name of the Lord among the heathen was blasphemed. 

Therefore the law, which Moses gave to be executed upon 
all malefactors and murderers in general, took hold on Christ, 
finding him with and among sinners and murderers, though 
in his own person innocent. 

This manner of picturing Christ to us, the sophists, robbers 
of God, obscure and falsify; for they will not that Christ 
was made a curse for usj to the end he might deliver us from 
the curse of the law, nor that he has anything to do with sin 
and poor sinners ; though for their sakes alone was he made 
man and died, but they set before us merely Christ's examples, 
which they say we ought to imitate and follow; and thus they 
not only steal from Christ his proper name and title, but also 
make of liim a severe and angry judge, a fearful and horrible 
tyrant, full of wrath against poor sinners, and bent on con- 
demning them. 

CCIII. 

The riding of our blessed Saviour into Jerusalem was a 
poor, mean kind of procession enough, where was seen Christ, 
king of heaven and earth, sitting upon a strange ass, his 
saddle being the clothes of his disciples. This mean equi- 
page, for so powerful a potentate, was, as the prophecy 
of the prophet Zechariah sliowed, to the end the scripture 
might be fulfilled. Yet 'twas an exceeding stately and 
glorious thing as extolled through the prophecies, though out- 
■wardly to the world it seemed poor and mean. 

I hold that Christ himself did not mention this prophecy, 
but that rather the apostles and evangelists used it for a wit- 
Dess. Christ, meantime, preached and wept, but the people 
honoured him with olive branches and palms, which are 
signs of peace and victory. Such ceremonies did the heathen 
receive of the Jews, and not the Jews of the heathen, as 
some pretend, for the nation of the Jews and Jerusalem was 
much older than the Greeks and Romans. The Greeks had 
their beginning about the time of the Babylonish captivity, 
but Jerusalem was long before the time of the Persians and 
Assyrians, and therefore much before the Greeks and Romans, 



90 Luther's table-talk. 

so that the heathen received many ceremonies from the Jews, 
as the elder nation. 

cci\ 

The Jews crjcified Christ with words, but the Gentiles 
have crucified him with works and deeds. His sufFerin<:s 
were prophetical of our wickedness, for Christ suffers still to 
this day in our church much more than in the synagogue of 
the Jews; far greater blaspheming of God, contempt, and 
tyranny, is now among us than heretofore among the Jews 
In Italy, when mention is made of the article of faith and 
of the last day of judgment, then says the pope with his 
greased crew: O! dost thou believe that? Pluck thou up a 
good heart, and be merry; let such cogitations alone. These 
and the like blasphemies are so common in all Italy, that, 
without fear of punishment, they openly proclaim them 
everywhere. 

ccv. 

The prophets spoke and preached of the second coming of 
Christ as we do now; we know that the last day will come 
yet we know not what and how it will be after this life, but 
only in general, that we, who are true Christians, shall have 
everlasting joy, peace, and salvation. The prophets held 
likewise, that soon after the coming of Christ, the last day 
would appear. First, they named the day of the Messiah 
the last day. Secondly, they set the signs of the first 
and second coming both together, as if they would happen 
at one time. Thirdly, in the Epistle to the Corinthians, they 
demanded of St. Paul, if the last day would appear while 
they lived. Fourthly, Christ himself related that these signs 
should come together. O! how willingly would I have been 
once with our Saviour Christ here on earth, when he rejoiced. 

rrvi. 
My opinion is, that Christ descended into hell, to the end 
he might lay the devil in chains, in order to bring him to 
the judgment of the great day, as in the 16th Psalm, and 
Acts ii. Disputatious spirits allege, that the word Infernus, 
Hell, must be taken and understood to be the grave, as in 
the first book of Moses, but yet here is written not oniy the 
Hebrew word Nahot — that is, pit, but Scola — that is, Gt- 
htnna, Hell; for the ancients made four different hells. 



OF JESUS CHRIST. 91 

CCVII. 

The resurrection of our Saviour Christ, in the preaching 
of the gospel, raises earthquakes in the world now, as when 
Christ arose out of the sepulchre bodily. To this day the 
world is moved, and great tumults arise, when we preach 
and confess the righteousness and holiness of Christ, and 
that through it only are we justified and saved. But such 
earthquakes and tumults are wholesome for us, yea, comfort- 
able, pleasant, and deUghtful to such as live in God's fear, 
and are true Christians; more to be desired than peace, rest, 
and quietness, with an evil conscience through sinning against 
God. 

The Jews flattered themselves that the kingdom of Christ 
would have been a temporal kingdom, and the apostles them- 
selves were of this opinion, as is noted, John xiv.: "Lord, 
how is it that thou wilt manifest thyself to us, and not to the 
world?" As much as to say: We thought the whole world 
should behold thy glorious state; that thou shouldst be em- 
peror, we twelve kings, among whom the kingdoms should 
be divided, and to each of us, for disciples, six princes, or 
dukes, &c., making the number of them seventy -two. In 
this manner had the loving apostles shared and divided the 
kingdoms among themselves, according to the Platonic mean- 
ing — that is, according to the wit and wisdom of human un- 
derstanding. But Christ describes his kingdom far other- 
wise: " He that loveth me, will keep my word, and my 
Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make 
our abode with him," &c. 

CCVIII. 

The communion or fellowship of our blessed Saviour 
Christ, was doubtless most loving and familiar; for he who 
thought it no dishonour, being equal with God, to be made 
man like unto us, yet without sin, served and waited upon 
his disciples as they sat at table, as my servant waits on me; 
ihe good disciples, plain, simple people, were at length so 
accustomed to it, that they were even content to let him wait. 
In such wise did Christ fulfil his office; as is written; *' He 
is come to minister, and not to be ministered unto." Ah, 
'tis a high example, that he so deeply humbled himself and 
sutfered, who created the whole world, heaven and earth, and 



92 LUTHEirs TABLE-TALK. 

all that IS therein, and who, with one finger, could have 
turned it upsid.e down and destroyed it. 

ccix. 

How wonderfully does Christ rule and govern his kingdom, 
so concealing himself that his presence is not seen, yet putting 
to shame emperors, kings, popes, and all such as think them- 
selves wise, just, and powerful. But hereunto belongs a 
Plerophoria — that is, we are sure and certain of it. 

Jesus Christ is the only beginning and end of all my 
divine cogitations, day and night, yet I find and freely con- 
fess that I have attained but only to a small and weak 
beginning of the height, depth, and breadth of this im- 
measurable, incomprehensible, and endless wisdom, and have 
scarce got and brought to light a few fragments out of this 
most deep and precious profundity. 

ccx. 
Christ's own proper work and ofiice is to combat the law, sin, 
and death, for the whole world; taking them all upon him- 
self, and bearing them, and after he has laden himself there- 
with, then only to get the victory, and utterly overcome and 
destroy them, and so release the desolate from the law and all 
evil. That Christ expounds the law, and works miracles, 
these are but small benefits, in comparison of the true good, 
for which he chiefly came. For the prophets, and especially 
the apostles, wrought and did as great miracles as Christ 
himself. 

CCXI. 

That our Saviour, Christ, is come, nothing avails hypo- 
crites, who live confident, not fearing God, nor contemners 
nor reprobates, who think there is no grace or comfort to be 
expected, and who by the law are afirighted. But he comes 
to the profit and comfort of those whom for a time the law 
has plagued and affi-ighted; these despair not in their trials 
and affrights, but with comfortable confidence step to Christ, 
the throne of grace, who delivers them. 

CCXII. 

Is it not a shame that we are always afraid of Christ, 
whereas there was never in heaven or earth a more loving, 
familiar, or milder man, in words, works, and demeanour, 



OP JESUS CHRIST. 93 

especially towards poor, sorrowful, and tormented con- 
sciences? Hence, the prophet Jeremiah prays, saying: " 
Lord, grant that we be not afraid of thee." 

CCXIII. 

It is written in Psalm li.: "Behold, thou requirest truth 
in the inward parts, and shalt make me to understand wis- 
dom secretly." This is that mystery which is hidden irom 
the world, and will remain hidden; it is the truth that lies in 
the inward parts, and the secret wisdom; not the wisdom of 
the lawyers, of the physicians, philosophers, and of the crafty 
ones of the world; no; but thy wisdom, O Lord! w^hich 
thou hast made me to understand. This is that golden art 
which Sadoleto had not, though he wrote much of this psalm. 

ccxiv. 

The preaching of the apostles went forth, and powerfully 
sounded through the whole world, after Christ's resurrection, 
when he had sent the Holy Ghost. This master, the Holy 
Ghost, worked through the apostles, and showed the doctrine 
of Christ clearly, so that their preaching produced more fruit 
than when Christ preached, as he himself before had declared, 
saying: "He that believeth in me, shall do also the works 
that 1 do, and shall do greater than these." 

Christ by force would not break through with his preach- 
ing, as he might have done, for he preached so powerfully 
that the people were astonished at his doctrine, but pro- 
ceeded softly and mildly in regard to the fathers, to whom he 
was promised, and of those that much esteemed them, to the 
end he might take aw^ay and abolish the ceremonial law, 
together with its service and worship. 

ccxv. 

Christ preached without wages, yet the godly w^omen, 
whom he had cleansed and made whole, and delivered from 
wicked spirits and diseases, ministered unto him of that 
which they had, (Luke viii.) They gave him supply, and he 
also took and received that which others freely and willingly 
gave him, (John xix.j 

When he sent the apostles forth to preach, he said: Freely 
ye have received, therefore freely give, ike, v/herein he 
forbids them not to take something for their pains and work, 



94 Luther's table-talk. 

but that they should not take care and sorrow for food and 
raiment, &c., for whithersoever they went, they should iind 
some people that would not see them want. 

ccxvi. 

The prophecies that the Son of God should take human 
nature upon him, are given so obscurely, that I think the 
devil knew not that Christ should be conceived by the Holy 
Ghost, and born of the Virgin INIary. 

Hence, when he tempted Christ in the wildernc'^s, he said 
to him: "If thou art the Son of God?" He calls him the 
Son of God, not that he held him so to be by descent and 
nature, but according to the manner of the Scripture, which 
names human creatures the children of God: " Ye are all the 
children of the Most Highest," &c. It was not desired that 
these prophecies of Christ's passion, resurrection, and king- 
dom, should be revealed before the time of his coming, save 
only to his prophets and other high enlightened people; it 
was reserved for the coming of Christ, the right and only 
doctor that should open the understanding. 

CCXVII. 

The reason why Peter and the other apostles did not 
expressly call Christ the Son of God, was that they would 
not give occasion to the godly Jews, who as yet were weak 
in faith, to shun and persecute their prenching, by appearing 
to declare a new God, and to reject the God of their fathers. 
Yet they mention, w^ith express words, the office of Christ 
and his works; that he is a prince of life; that he raises from 
the dead, justifies and forgives sins, hears prayers, enlightens 
and comforts hearts, &c., wherewith they clearly and suffi- 
ciently show and acknowledge that he is the true God; for 
no creature can perform such works but God only. 

CCXVIII. 

The devil assaults the Christian world with highest power 
and subtlety, vexing true Christians through tyrants, heretics, 
and false brethren, and instigating the whole world against 
them. 

On the contrary, Christ resists the devil and his kingdom, 
with a few simple and contemned people, as they seem in the 
world, weak and foolish, and yet he gets the victory. 



OP JESUS CHRIST. 95 

Now, it were a very unequal war for one poor sheep to 
encounter a hundred wolves, as it befel the apostles, wlien 
Christ sent them out into the world, when one after another 
was made away with and slain. Against wolves we should 
rather send out lions, or more fierce and horrible beasts. 
But Christ has pleasure therein, to show his highest wisdom 
and power in our greatest weakness and foolishness, as the 
world conceives, and so proceeds that all shall eat their own 
bane, and go to the devil, who set themselves against his 
servants and disciples. 

For he alone, the Lord of Hosts, does wonders; he pre- 
serves his sheep in the midst of wolves, and himself so 
afflicts them, that we plainly see our faith consists not in 
the power of human wisdom, but in the power of God, for 
although Christ permit one of his sheep to be devoured, yet 
he sends ten or more others in his place. 

CCXIX. 

Many say that Christ having by force driven the buyers 
and sellers out of the temple, we also may use force against 
the popish bishops and enemies of God's Word, as 
Munzer and other seducers. But Christ did many things 
which we neither may nor can do after him. He walked 
upon the water, he fasted forty days and forty nights, he 
raised Lazarus from death, after he had lain four days in the 
grave, &c. ; such and the like we must leave undone. Much 
less will Christ consent that we by force assail the enemies 
of the truth; he commands the contrary: "Love your 
enemies, pray for them that vex and persecute you ;" " Be 
merciful, as your Father is merciful;" " Take my yoke upon 
you and learn of me, for I am meek and humble in heart;" 
" He that will follow me, let him deny himself, take up his 
cross, and follow me." 

ccxx. 

'Tis a great wonder how the name of Christ has remained 
in Popedom, where, for hundreds of years, nothing was 
delivered to the people but the pope's laws and decrees, that 
is, doctrines and commandments of men, so that it had been 
no marvel if the name of Christ and his word had been for- 
gotten. 

Rut God wonderfully preserved his gospel in the church, 



96 Luther's table-talk. 

which now from the pulpits is taught to the people, word by- 
word. In like manner, it is a special great work of God, 
that the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, Baptisra, and the Lord's 
Supper, have remained and cleaved to tlie hearts of those 
who were ordained to receive them in the- midst of Popedom. 
God has also often awakened piouf learned men, who 
revealed his Word, and gave them courage openly to reprove 
the false doctrines and abuses that were crept into the 
church, as John Huss, and others. 

ccxxi. 
The kingdom of Christ is a kingdom of grace, mercy, and 
of all comfort; Psalm cxvii.: " His grace and truth is ever 
more and more towards us." The kingdom of Antichrist, 
the pope, is a kingdom of lies and destruction; Psalm x. : 
"His mouth is full of cursing, fraud, and deceit; under his 
tongue is migodliness and vanity." The kingdom of Mo- 
hammed is a kingdom of revenge, of wrath, and desolation, 
Ezek. xxxviii. 

CCXXII. 

The weak in faith also belong to the kingdom of Christ; 
otherwise the Lord would not have said to Peter, " Strengthen 
thy brethren," Luke, xxii. ; and Rom. xiv.: "Receive the 
weak in faith;" also 1 Thess. v.: " Comfort the feeble-minded, 
support the w^eak." If the weak in faith did not belong to 
Christ, where, then, would the apostles have been, whom the 
Lord oftentimes, as after his resurrection, Mark, xvi., re- 
proved because of their unbelief ? 

CCXXIII. 

A cup of water, if a man can have no better, is good to 
quench the thirst. A morsel of bread stills the hunger, and 
he that needs it seeks it earnestly. Christ is the best, surest, 
and only physic against the most fearful enemy of mankind, 
the devil; but men believe it not with their hearts. If they 
want a physician, living a hundred miles off, who, they think, 
can drive away temporal death, oh, how dihgently is he sent 
for — no money or cost is spared! But the small and little heap 
only stick fast to the true physician, and by his art learn that 
which the holy Simeon well knew by reason of which he 
'oyfuUy sang; " Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in 



OF JESUS CHRIST. 97 

peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation!" Whence came 
ins great joy? Because that with spiritual and corporal eyes 
he saw the Saviour of the world, the true physician against 
sin and death. 'Tis a great pain to behold how desirous a 
thirsty man is of drink, or a hungry man of food, though a 
cup of water or morsel of bread can still hunger and thirst 
no longer than two or three hours, while no man, or very 
few, desires or longs after the most precious of all physicians, 
though he lovingly calls us to come unto him, saying, " He 
that is athirst, let him come to me and drink," John, vii. 

ccxxiv. 

Even as Christ is now invisible and unknown to the world, 
so are we Christians also invisible and unknown therein. 
" Your life," says St. Paul, Coloss. iii., " is hid with Christ 
in God." Therefore the world knows us not, much less does 
it see Christ in us. But we and the world are easily parted; 
they care nothing for us, and we nothing for them; Christ the 
world is crucified unto us, and we to the world. Let them 
go with their wealth, and leave us to our minds and manners. 

When we have our sweet and loving Saviour Christ, we 
are rich and happy more than enough; we care nothing for 
their state, honour, and wealth. But we often lose our Sa- 
viour Christ, and little think that he is in us, and we in him; 
that he is ours, and we are his. Yet although he hide from 
us, as we think, in the time of need, for a moment, yet are 
we comforted in his promise, where he says, " I am daily 
with you to the world's end;" this is our richest treasure. 

ccxxv. 
Christ desires nothing more of us than that we speak of 
him. But thou w^ilt say: If 1 speak or preach of him, then 
the w^ord freezes upon my lips. 0, regard not that, but hear 
what Christ says: " Ask, and it shall be given unto you," 
&c.; and, "I am with him in trouble," " I will deliver him, 
and bring him to honour," &c. Also: " Call upon me in the 
time of trouble, so will I hear thee, and thou shalt praise me,* 
&c.. Psalm 1. How^ could we perform a more easy service 
of God, without all labour or charge? There is no work on 
earth easier than the true service of God; he loads us with 
no heavy burthens, but only asks that we believe in him and 
preach of him. True, thou mayest be sure thou shalt be per- 

B 



98 LUTHER S TABLE-TALK. 

secuted for tliis, but our sweet Saviour gives us a comfort- 
able promise: " I will be with you in the time of trouble, and 
will help you out," &c., Luke, xii. 7. I make no such pro- 
mise to my servant when I set him to work, either to plough 
or to cart, as Christ to me, that he will help me in my need. 
We only fail in belief: if I had faith according as the Scrip- 
tures requires of me, I alone would drive the Turk out of 
Constantinople, and the pope out of Rome; but it comes far 
short; I must rest satisfied with that which Christ spake to 
St. Paul: " My grace is sufficient for thee, for my power is 
strong in weakness." 

ccxxvi. 
From these words, John, xiii., which Christ spake to Peter: 
" If I wash thee not, thou hast no part in me," it is not to be 
understood that Christ, at the same time, baptized his dis- 
ciples; for in John, iv., it is clearly expressed that he him- 
self baptized none, but that his disciples, at his command, 
baptized each other. Neither did the Lord speak these words 
only of w^ater washing, but of spiritual washing, through 
which he, and none other, washes and cleanses Peter, the 
other disciples, and all true believers, from their sins, and 
justifies and saves them; as if he would say: I am the true 
bather, therefore if I wash thee not, Peter, thou remainest 
unclean, and dead in thy sins. 

The reason thr.t Christ washed not his own, but his dis- 
ciples' feet, whereas the high-priest in the law washed not 
others' but his own, was this: the high-priest in the law w^as 
unclean, and a sinner like other men, therefore he washed 
his own feet, and offered not only for the sins of the people, 
but also for his own. But our everlasting High-priest is 
holy, innocent, unstained,- and separate from sin; therefore 
it was needless for him to wash his feet, but he washed and 
cleansed us, through his blood, from all our sins. 

Moreover, by this his washing of feet he Would show, that 
his new kingdom which he would establish should be no tem- 
poral and outward kingdom, where respect of persons was to 
be held, as in Moses' kingdom, one higher and greater than 
the other, but where one should serve another in humility, as 
he says: " He that is greatest among you, let him be your 
servant;" which he himself showed by this example, as h^. 
says, John, xiii. : " If I your Lord and Master have washed 
your feet, then ought ye to wash one another's feet." 



OF JESUS CHRIST. 99 

CCXXVII. 

So long as Jupiter, Mars, Apollo, Saturn, Juno, Diana. 
Pallas, and Venus ruled among the heathen — that is, were held 
and worshipped for gods, the Jews having also very many- 
idols which they served, it was necessary that first Christ, 
and after him the apostles, should do many miracles, corporal 
and spiritual, both among the Jews and Gentiles, to confirm 
this doctrine of faith in Christ, and to take away and root 
out all Avorshipping of idols. The visible and bodily wonders 
flourished until the doctrine of the gospel was planted and 
received, and baptism and the Lord's Supper established. 
But the spiritual miracles, which our Saviour Christ hoi is for 
miracles indeed, are daily wrought, and will remain to the 
world's end, as that of the centurion, in Matt, viii., a ad that 
of the Canaanitish woman. 

CCXXVIII. 

The greatest wonder ever on earth is, that the Son of God 
died the shameful death of the cross. It is astonishinjf, that 
the Father should say to his only Son, who by nature is God: 
Go, let them hang thee on the gallows. The love of the 
everlasting Father was immeasurably greater tow irds his 
only begotten Son than the love of Abraham towar Is Isaac; 
for the Father testifies from heaven; " This is my beloved 
Son, in whom lam well pleased;" yet he was cast away so 
lamentably, like a worm, a scorn of men, and outcast of the 
people. - 

At this the blind understanding of man stumbles, saying. 
Is this the only begotten Son of the everlasting Father — how, 
then, deals he so unmercifully with him? he showed himself 
more kind to Caiphas, Herod, and Pilate, than towards his 
only beloved Son. But to us true Christians, it is the greatest 
comfort; for we therein recognise that the merciful Lord God 
and Father so loved the poor condemned world, that he spared 
not his only begotten Son, but gave him up for us all, that 
whosoever believeth in liim should not perish, but have ever- 
lasting life. 

They who are tormented with high spiritual temptations, 
which every one is not able to endure, should have this ex- 
ample before their eyes, when they are in sorrow and heavi- 
ness of spirit, fearing God's wrath, the day of judgment, and 

h2 



100 LUTHER S TABLE-TALK. 

everlasting death, and such like fiery darts of the devil. Let 
them comfort themselves, that although they often feel such 
intolerable sufferings, yet are they never the more rejected 
of God, but are of him better beloved, seeing he makes them 
like unto his only begotten Son; and let them believe, that as 
they suffer with him, so will he also deliver them out of their 
sufferings. For such as will live godly in Christ Jesus must 
suffer persecution; yet one more than another, according to 
every one's strength or weakness in faith: "For God is 
true, who will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are 
able to bear." 

CCXXIX. 

It was a wonderful thing w^hen our Saviour Christ as- 
cended up into heaven, in full view of his disciples. Some, 
no doubt, thought in themselves: We did eat and drink with 
him, and now he is taken from us, and carried up into heaven; 
are all these things right? Such reasonings, doubtless, some 
of them had, for they were not all alike strong in faith, as St. 
Matthew writes: When the eleven saw the Lord, they wor- 
shipped, but some doubted. And during those forty days, 
from the resurrection until the ascension, the Lord taught 
them by manifold arguments, and instructed them in all ne- 
cessary things; he strengthened their faith, and put them in 
mind of what he had told them before, to the end they should 
in nowise doubt of his person. 

Yet his words made Httle impression, for when the Lord 
appeared in the midst of them, on Easter-day, at evening, and 
said: "Peace be w^thyou," they were perplexed and affrighted, 
supposing they saw a spirit; nor would Thomas believe that 
the other disciples had seen the Lord, until he saw the print 
of the nails in his hands. And though for the space of forty 
days he had communed with them concerning the kingdom 
of God, and was even ready to ascend, yet, notwithstanding, 
they asked him. Lord! wilt thou at this time restore again 
the kingdom to Israel? 

But after this, on Whitsunday, when they had received 
the Holy Ghost, then they were of another mind; they then 
stood no more in fear of the Jews, but rose up boldly, and 
with great joyfulness preached Christ to the people. And 
Peter said to the lame man: Silver and gold have I none, but 
what I ha^e, that give I thee; in the name of Jesus Christ 
of Nazareth, rise up and walk. Yet notvritlistanding all 



OF JESUS CHRIST, 101 

this, the Lord was fain to show unto him, through a Tision, 
that the Gentiles should be partakers of the promise of life, 
idthough, before his ascension, he had heard this command 
from the Lord himself: " Go ye into all the world, and preach 
the gospel to every creature." And " Teach all nations." 

The apostles themselves did not know everything, even 
after they had received the Holy Ghost; yea, and sometinies 
they were weak in faith. When all Asia turned from St. 
Paul, and some of his own disciples had departed from him, 
and many false spirits that w^ere in high esteem set them- 
selves against him, then wath sorrow of heart he said: "I 
was with you in weakness, fear, and in much trembling." 
And " We were troubled on every side; without were fight- 
ings, and wdthin w^ere fears." Hereby it is evident that he 
was not always strong in faith: and moreover the Lord was 
fain to comfort him, saying: " My grace is sufficient for thee, 
for my power is strong in weakness." 

This is to me, and to all true Christians, a comfortable 
doctrine; for I persuade myself also that I have faith, though 
it is but so so, and might well be better; yet I teach the faith 
to others, and knoAv, that my teaching is right. Sometimes 
I commune thus with myself : Thou preachest indeed God's 
word; this office is committed to thee, and thou art called 
thereunto without thy seeking, which is not fruitless, for 
many thereby are reformed; but when I consider and behold 
my own weakness, that I eat, drink, sometimes am merry, 
yea, also, now and then am overtaken, being off my guard, 
then I begin to doubt and say: Ah! that we could but only 
believe. 

Therefore, confident professors are troublesome and dan- 
gerous people; who, when they have but only looked on the 
outside of the Bible, or heard a few sermons, presently think 
they have the Holy Ghost, and understand and know all. But 
good and godly hearts are of another mind, and pray daily: 
" Lord strengthen our faith." 

ccxxx. 

When Jesus Christ utters a word, he opens his mouth so 
wide that it embraces all heaven and earth, even though that 
word be but in a wdiisper. The word of the emperor is 
powerful, but that of Jesus Christ governs tbe whole uni- 
verse 



102 Luther's table-talk. 

ccxxxi. 

I expect more goodness from Kate my wife, from Philip 
Melancthon, and from other friends, than from my sweet and 
blessed Saviour Christ Jesus; and yet I know for certain, 
that neither she nor any other person on earth, will or can 
suffer that for me which he has suffered; why then should 
I be afraid of him ! This my foolish weakness grieves me 
very much. We plainly see in the gospel, how mild and 
gentle he showed himself towards his disciples; how kindly 
he passed over their weakness, their presumption, yea, their 
foolishness. He checked their unbelief, and in all gentleness 
admonished them. Moreover, the Scripture, which is most 
sure, says: " Well are all they that put their trust in him." 
Fie on our unbelieving hearts, that we should be afraid of 
this man, who is more loving, friendly, gentle, and com- 
passionate towards us than are our kindred, our brethren and 
sisters; yea, than parents themselves are towards their own 
children. 

He that has such temptations, let him be assured, it is not 
Christ, but the envious devil that affrights, wounds, and 
would destroy him; for Christ comforts, heals, and revives. 

Oh! his grace and goodness towards us is so immeasurably 
great, that without great assaults and trials it cannot be un- 
derstood. If the tyrants and false brethren had not set them- 
selves so fiercely against me, my writings and proceedings, 
then should I have vaunted myself too much of my poor gifts 
and qualities; nor should I with such fervency of heart have 
directed my prayers to God for his divine assistance; I should 
not have ascribed all to God's grace, but to mine own dex- 
terity and power, and so should have flown to the devil. But 
to the end this might be prevented, my gracious Lord and 
Saviour Christ caused me to be chastised; he ordained that 
the devil" should plague and torment me with his fiery darts, 
inwardly and outwardly, through tyrants, as the pope and 
other heretics, and all this he sufiered to be done for my 
jorood. " It is good for me that I have been in trouble, that 
I may learn thy statutes." 

CCXXXII. 

I know nothing of Jesus Christ but only his name; I have 
not heard or seen him corporally, yet I have, God be praised, 
learned so much out of the Scriptures, that I am well and 



OF JESUS CHRIST. 103 

thoroughly satisfied; therefore I desire neither to see nor to 
hear him in the body. When left and forsaken of all men, 
in my highest weakness, in trembling, and in fear of death, 
when persecuted of the wicked world, then I felt most deeply 
the divine power which this name, Christ Jesus, communi- 
cated unto me. 

CCXXXIII. 

It is no wonder that Satan is an enemy to Christ, his 
people and kingdom, and sets himself against him and his 
word, with all his power and cunning. 'Tis an old hate and 
grudge between them, which began in Paradise; for they are, 
by nature and kind, of contrary minds and dispositions. The 
devil smells Christ many hundred miles off; he hears at 
Constantinople and at Rome, what we at Wittenberg teach 
and preach against his kingdom; he feels also what hurt and 
damage he sustains thereby; therefore rages and swells he so 
horribly. 

But what is more to be w^ondered at is, that w^e, who are 
of one kind and nature, and, through the bond of love, knit 
so fast together that each ought to love the other as himself, 
should have, at times, such envy, hate, wrath, discord and re- 
venge, that one is ready to kill the other. For who is nearer 
allied to a man than his wife; to the son, than his father; to 
the daughter, than her mother; to the brother, than his 
sister, &c.? yet, it is most commonly found, that discord 
and strife are among them. 

ccxxxiv. 
It is impossible that the gospel and the law should dwell 
together in one heart, for of necessity either Christ must yield 
and give place to the law, or the law to Christ. St. Paul says: 
" They which will be justified through the law, are fallen 
from grace." Therefore, when thou art of this mind, that 
Christ and the confidence of the law may dwell together in 
thy heart, then thou mayst know for certain that it is not 
Christ, but the devil that dwells in thee, who under the mask 
and form of Christ terrifies thee. He will have, that thou 
make thyself righteous through the law, and through thy own 
good works; for the true Christ calls thee not to an account fof 
thy sins, nor commands thee to trust in thy good works, but 
says: " Come unto me all ye that be weary and heavy laden, 
and I will give you rest," &c. 



104 Luther's table-talk. 

ccxxxv. 
I have set Christ and the pope together bj the ears, so 
trouble myself no further; though I get between the door and 
the hinges and be squeezed, it is no matter; Christ will go 
through with it. 

ccxxxvi. 

Christ once appeared visible here on earth, and showed his 
glory, and according to the divine purpose of God finished 
the work of redemption and the deliverance of mankind. I 
do not desire he should come once more in the same manner, 
neither would I he should send an angel unto me. Nay, 
though an angel should come and appear before mine eyes 
from heaven, yet it would not add to my belief; for I have of 
my Saviour Christ Jesus bond and seal; I have his Word, 
Spirit, and sacrament; thereon I depend, and desire no new 
revelations. And the more steadfastly to confirm me in this 
resolution, to hold solely by God's Word, and not to give credit 
to any visions or revelations, I shall relate the following 
circumstance: — On Good Friday last, I being in my chamber 
in fervent prayer, contemplating with myself, how Christ my 
Saviour on the cross suffered and died for our sins, there 
suddenly appeared upon the wall a bright vision of our Saviour 
Christ, with the five wounds, steadfastly looking upon me, as 
if it had been Christ himself corporally. At first sight, I 
thought it had been some celestial revelation, but I reflected 
that it must needs be an illusion and juggling of the devil, for 
Christ appeared to us in his Word, and in a meaner and more 
humble form; therefore I spake to the vision thus: Avoid 
thee, confounded devil: I know no other Christ than he who 
was crucified, and who in his Word is pictured and presented 
unto me. Whereupon the image vanished, clearly showing 
of whom it came. 

ccxxxvii. 

Alas ! what is our wit and wisdom ? before we under, 
stand anything as we ought, we lie down and die, so that the 
devil has a good chance with us. When one is thirty/ years 
old, he has still Stultitias cartiales; yea also, Stultitias spi- 
rituales; and yet 'tis much to be admired at, how in such 
our imbecility and weakness, we achieve and accomplish 
much and great matters, but 'tis God does it. God gave to 



OF JESUS CHRIST. 105 

Alexander the Great wisdom and good suecess; yet he calls 
him, in the prophet Jeremiah, a youth, where he says, a young 
boy shall perform it; he shall come and turn the city Tyre 
upside down. Yet Alexander could not leave oiF his foolish- 
ness, for often he swilled himself drunk, and in his drunken- 
ness stabbed his best and worthiest friends, and afterwards 
drank himself to death at Babylon. Solomon was not above 
twenty when he was made king, but he was well instructed 
by Nathan, and desired wisdom, which was pleasing to God, 
as the text says: But now, chests full of money are desired. 
O ! say we now, if I had but money, then I would do so 
and so. 

CCXXXVIII. 

Christ said to the heathen woman: I am not sent but to 
the lost sheep of the house of Israel; yet afterwards he helped 
both her and her daughter; therefore a man might say : 
Christ here contradicted himself. I reply: True, Christ was 
not sent to the Gentiles, but when the Gentiles came unto 
him, he would not reject or put them from him. In person 
he was sent only to the Jews, and therefore he preached in 
the land of the Jews. But through the apostles his doctrine 
went into the whole world. And St. Paul names the Lord 
Christ, ministrum circumcisionis, by reason of the promise 
which God gave to the fathers. The tlews themselves boast 
of God's justness in performing what he promised, but we 
Gentiles boast of God's mercy; God has not forgotten us 
Gentiles. Indeed, God spake not with us, neither had we 
king or prophet with whom God spake; but St. Paul, in an- 
other place, says: It was necessary that the word should first 
be preached to you, but seeing you will not receive it, lo! we 
turn to the Gentiles. At this the Jews are much offended to 
this day; they flatter themselves: Messiah is only and alone 
for them and theirs. Indeed, it is a glorious name and title 
that Moses gives them: Thou art an holy nation: but David, 
in his psalm, afterwards promises Christ to the Gentiles: 
" Praise the Lord all ye nations." 

ccxxxix. 
We should consider the histories of Christ three manner d 
ways; first, as a history of acts or legends; secondly, as a 
gift or a present; thirdly, as an example, which we should 
believe and follow. 



106 Luther's table-talk. 

CCXL. 

Christ, our blessed Saviour, forbore to preach and teach 
until the thirtieth year of his age, neither would he openly 
be heard; no, though he beheld and heard so many impieties, 
abominable idolatries, heresies, blasphemings of God, &c. It 
was a wonderful thing he could abstain, and with patience 
endure them, until the time came that he was to appear in his 
office of preaching. 



OF THE HOLY GHOST. 

CCXLI. 

The Holy Ghost has two offices: first, He is a Spirit of 
grace, that makes God gracious unto us, and receive us as his 
acceptable children, for Christ's sake. Secondly, He is a 
Spirit of prayer, that prays for us, and for the whole world, 
to the end that all evil may be turned from us, and that 
all good may happen to us. The spirit of grace teaches 
people; the spirit of prayer prays. It is a wonder how one 
thing is accomplished various ways. It is one thing to have 
the Holy Spirit as a spirit of prophecy, and another to have 
the revealing of the same; for many have had the Holy Spirit 
before the birth of Christ, and yet he was not revealed unto 
them. 

We do not separate the Holy Ghost from faith ; neither do 
we teach thcit he is against faith; for he is the certainty itself 
in the world, that makes us sure and certain of the Word; 
so that, without all wavering or doubting, we certainly believe 
that it is even so and no otherwise than as God's Word says 
and is delivered unto us. But the Holy Ghost is given to 
none without the Word. 

Mohhammad, the pope, papists, Antinomians, and other 
sectaries, have no certainty at all, neither can they be sure of 
these things; for they depend not on God's Word, but on their 
own righteousness. And when they have done many and 
great works, yet they always stand in doubt, and say: Who 
knows whether this which we have done be pleasing to God 
or no; or, whether we have done works enough or no? They 
must continually think with themselves, We are still unworthy. 



OF THE HOLY GHOST. 107 

But a true and godly Christian, between these two doubts, is 
8ure and certain, and says: I nothing regard these doubtings; 
I neither look upon my holiness, nor upon my unworthiness, 
but I believe in Jesus Christ, who is both holy and worthy; 
and whether I be holy or unholy, yet I am sure and certain, 
that Christ gives himself, with all his holiness, worthiness, 
and what he is and has, to be mine own. For my part, I 
am a poor sinner, and that I am sure of out of God's Word. 
Therefore, the Holy Ghost only and alone is able to say: 
Jesus Christ is the Lord; the Holy Ghost teaches, preaches, 
and declares Christ. 

The Holy Ghost goes first and before in what pertains to 
teaching; but in what concerns hearing, the AVord goes first 
and before, and then the Holy Ghost follows after. For we 
must first hear the Word, and then afterwards the Holy 
Ghost works in our hearts; he works in the hearts of whom 
he will, and how he will, but never without the Word. 

CCXLII. 

The Holy Ghost began his office and work openly on 
Whitsunday; for he gave to the apostles and disciples of 
Christ a true and certain comfort in their hearts, and a secure 
and joyful courage, insomuch that they regarded not whether 
the world and the devil were merry or sad, friends or enemies, 
angry or pleased. They went in all security up and down 
the streets of the city, and doubtless they had these, or the 
like thoughts: We regard neither Annas nor Caiphas, Pilate 
nor Herod; they are nothing worth, we all in all; they are 
our subjects and servants, we their lords and rulers. 

So went the loving apostles on, in all courage, without 
seeking leave or licence. 

They asked not whether they should preach or no, or 
whether the priests and people would allow it. O, no ! They 
went on boldly, they opened their mouths freely, and reproved 
all the people, rulers and subjects, as murderers, wicked 
wretches, and traitors, who had slain the Prince of Life. 

And this spirit, so needful and necessary at that time 
for the apostles and disciples, is now needful for us; for our 
adversaries accuse us, like as were the apostles, as rebels and 
disturbers of the peace of the Church. Whatsoever evil 
happens, that, say they, have we done or caused. In Pope- 



9 
108 LTJTHER*S TABLE-TALK. 

dom, say they, it was not so evil as it is since this doctrine 
came in; now we have all manner of mischiefs, dearth, wars, 
and the Turks. Of this they lay all the fault to our preach- 
ing, and, if they could, would charge us with bemg the cause 
of the devil's falling from heaven; yea, would say we had 
crucified and slain Christ also. 

Therefore the Whitsuntide sermons of the Holy Ghost are 
very needful for us, that thereby we may be comforted, and 
with boldness contemn and slight such blaspheming, and that 
the Holy Ghost may put boldness and courage into our hearts, 
that we may stoutly thrust ourselves forward, let who will be 
offended, and let who will reproach us, and, that although 
sects and heresies arise, we may not regard them. Such a 
courage there must be that cares for nothing, but boldly and 
freely acknowledges and preaches Christ, who of wicked 
hands was crucified and slain. 

The preached gospel is offensive in all places of the world, 
rejected and condemned. 

If the gospel did not offend and anger citizen or country- 
man, prince or bishop, then it would be a fine and an acceptable 
preaching, and might well be tolerated, and people would 
willingly hear and receive it. But seeing it is a kind of 
preaching which makes people angry, especially the great and 
powerful, and deep-learned ones of the world, great courage 
is necessary, and the Holy Ghost, to those that intend to 
preach it. 

It was, indeed, undaunted courage in the poor fishers, the 
apostles, to stand up and preach so that the whole council at 
Jerusalem were offended, to bring upon themselves the wrath 
of the whole government, spiritual and temporal — yea, of the 
Roman emperor himself Truly, this could not have been 
done without the Holy Ghost. 'Twas a great wonder that the 
high-priest, and Pontius Pilate, did not cause these preachers 
that hour to be put to death, what they said smacking so 
much of rebellion against the spiritual and temporal govern- 
ment; yet both high-priest and Pilate were struck with fear 
to the end that God might show his power in the apostles 
weakness. 

Thus it is with the church of Christ, it goes on in appa- 
rent weakness; and yet in its weakness, there is such mighty 
strength and power, that all the worldly wise and powerful 
must stand amazed thereat and fear. 



OF THE HOLY fiHOST. \0? 



It is testified by Holy Scripture, and tho Nicnsan creed 
out of Holy Scripture teaches that the Holy Ghost is he who 
makes alive, and, together with the Father and the Son, is 
worshipped and glorified. 

Therefore the Holy Ghost, of necessity, must be true and 
everlasting God with the Father and the Son, in one only 
essence. For if he w^ere not true and everlasting God, then 
could not be attributed and given unto him the divine power 
and honour that he makes alive, and together with the Father 
and the Son is worshipped and glorified; on this point the 
Fathers powerfully set themselves against the heretics, upon 
the strength of Holy Scripture. 

The Holy Ghost is not such a comforter as the world is, 
where neither truth nor constancy is, but he is a true, an 
everlasting, and a constant comforter, without deceit and lies 
he is one whom no man can deceive. He is called a witness, 
because he bears witness only of Christ and of none other; 
without his testimony concerning Christ, there is no true or 
firm comfort. Therefore all rests on this, that we take sure 
hold of the text, and say: I believe in Jesus Christ, who died 
for me; and I know that the Holy Ghost, who is called, and 
is a witness and a comforter, preaches and witnesses in 
Christendom of none, but only of Christ, therewith to 
strengthen and comfort all sad and sorrowful hearts. There- 
on will I also remain, depending upon none other for com- 
fort. Our blessed vSaviour Christ himself preaches that the 
Holy Ghost is everlasting and Almighty God. Otherwise 
he would not have directed his commission thus: Go, and 
teach all nations, and baptize them in the name of the Father, 
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and teach them to keep 
and observe all things whatsoever I have commanded of you. 
It must needs follow, that the Holy Ghost is true, eternal 
God, equal in power and might with the Father and the Son, 
without all end. Likewise Christ says : " And I will pray 
the Father, and he shall give you another comforter, that he 
may abide with you for ever; even the Spirit of Truth, whom 
the world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither 
knoweth him." Mark well this sentence, for herein we finc^ 
the difference of the three persons distinctly held out unto us: 
*• I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another com- 



110 Luther's tablk-talk. 

forter." Here we have two persons — Christ the Son that 
prays, and the Father that is prayed unto. Now, if the 
Father shall give such a comforter, then the Father himself 
cannot be that comforter; neither can Christ, that prays, be 
the same; so that very significantly the three persons are 
here plainly pictured and portrayed unto us. For even as the 
Father and the Son are tAvo distinct and sundry persons, so 
the third person of the Holy Ghost is another distinct person, 
and yet notwithstanding there is but one only everlasting 
God. 

Now, what the same third person is, Christ teaches (John, 
XV.) : " But w^hen the Comforter is come, whom I will send 
unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of Truth, which 
proceedeth from the Father, he shall testify of me." 

In this place, Christ speaks not only of the office and work 
of the Holy Ghost, but also of his essence and substance, and 
says : " He proceedeth from the Father;" that is, his pro- 
ceeding is without beginning, and is everlasting. Therefore 
the holy prophets attribute and give unto him this title, and 
caU him « The Spirit of the Lord." 



OF SINS. 

CCXLIV. 

None of the Fathers of the Church made mention of ori- 
ginal sin until Augustin came, who made a difference between 
original and actual sin; namely, that original sin is to covet, 
lust, and desire, which is the root and cause of actual sin; such 
lust and desire in the faithful, God forgives, imputing it not 
unto them, for the sake of Christ, seeing they resist it by the as- 
sistance of the Holy Ghost. As St. Paul, Rom. viii. The papists 
and other sinners oppose the known truth. St. Paul says: " A 
man that is an heretic after the first and second admonition, 
rejects," knowing that such an one sins, being condemned of 
himself. And Christ says: '-Let them alone, they are blind 
*eaders of the blind." If one err through ignorance, he will 
be instructed; but if he be hardened, and will not yield to 
the truth, like Pharaoh, who would not acknowledge his sins, 



k^F SINS. Ill 

or humble himself before God, and therefore was destroyed 
in the Red Sea, even so will he be destroyed. We are all 
sinners by nature — conceived and born in sin; sin has poi- 
soned us through and through; we have from Adam a will, 
which continually sets itself against God, unless by the Holy 
Ghost it be renewed and changed. Of this neither the phi- 
losophers nor the lawyers know anything; therefore they are 
justly excluded from the circuit of divinity, not grounding 
their doctrine upon God's word. 

CCXLV. 

Sins against the Holy Ghost are, first, presumption; second, 
despair; third, opposition to and condemnation of the known 
truth; fourth, not to wish well, but to grudge one's brother 
or neighbour the grace of God; fifth, to be hardened; sixth, 
to be impenitent. 

CCXLVI. 

The greatest sins committed against God, are the viola- 
tions of the first table of the law. No man understands or 
feels these sins, but he that has the Holy Ghost and the grace 
of God. Therefore people feeling secure, though they draw 
God's wrath upon them, yet flatter themselves they still re- 
main in God's favour. Yea, they corrupt the Word of God, 
and condemn it; yet think they do that which is pleasing 
and a special service to God. As for example: Paul held 
the law of God to be the highest and most precious treasure 
on earth, as we do the gospel. He would venture life and 
blood to maintain it; and he thought he wanted neither un- 
derstanding, wisdom, nor power. But before he could rightly 
look about him, and while he thought his cause most sure, 
then he heard another lesson, he got another manner of com- 
mission, and it was told him plainly, that all his works, 
actions, dihgence and zeal, were quite against God. Yet his 
doings carried a fair favour with the learned and seeming 
holy people, who said, Paul dealt herein uprightly, and per- 
formed divine and holy works, in showing such zeal for God's 
honour and for the law. 

But God struck him on the ear, that he fell to the ground, 
and heard, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? As if he 
should say, Saul, even with that wherein thou thinkest to do 
me service, thou dost nothing but persecute me, as my 



112 luther's table-talk. 

greatest enemy. It is true, thou boastest that thou hast my 
word, that thou understandest the law, and wilt earnestly 
defend and maintain it; thou receivest testimony and autho- 
rity from the elders and scribes, and in such thy conceit and 
blind zeal thou proceedest. But know, that in my law I have 
commanded, that whoso taketh my name in vain shall die. 
Thou, Saul, takest my name in vain; therefore thou art justly 
punished. Whereupon he said: Lord, what wilt thou have 
me to do? Mark, this man was a master in the law of Moses, 
and yet, he asked what he should do? 

CCXLVII. 

We have within us many sins against our Lord God, and 
which justly displease him: such as anger, impatience, 
covetousness, greediness, incontinence, hatred, malice, &c. 
These are great sins, which everywhere in the world go on 
with power, and get the upper hand. Yet these are nothing 
in comparison of contemning of God's word; yea, all these 
would remain uncommitted, if we did but love and reverence 
that. But, alas! the whole world is drowned in this sin. No 
man cares a fillip for the gospel, all snarl at and persecute it, 
holding it as no sin. I behold with wonder in the church, 
that among the hearers, one looks this way, another that; 
and that among so great a multitude, few come to hear the 
sermon. This sin is so common, that people will not confess 
it to be like other sins; every one deems it a slight thing to 
hear a discourse without attention, and not diligently to 
mark, learn, and inwardly digest it. It is not so about other 
sins; as murder, adultery, thieving, &c. For, after these 
sins, in due time follow grief, sorrow of heart, and remorse. 
But not to hear God's word with diligence, yea, to contemn, 
to persecute it, of this man makes no account. Yet it is a 
sin so fearful, that for the committing it both land and people 
must be destroyed, as it went with Jerusalem, with Rome, 
Greece, and other kingdoms. 

CCXLVIII. 

Christ well knew how to discriminate sins; we see in the 
gospel how harsh he was towards the Pharisees, by reason of 
their great hatred and envy against him and his Word, 
while, on the contrary, how mild and friendly he was 
towards the woman who was a sinner. That same envy wiii 



OF SINS. 113 

needs rob Christ of his word, for he is a bitier enemy unto 
it, and in the end will crucify it. But the woman, as the 
greatest sinner, takes hold on the Word, hears Christ, and 
believes that he is the only Saviour of the world; she washes 
his feet, and anoints him with a costly water. 

CCXLIX. 

Let us not think ourselves more just than was the poor 
sinner and murderer on the cross. I believe if the apostles 
had not fallen, they would not have believed in the remission of 
sins. Therefore, when the devil upbraids me, touching my 
sins, then I say: Good St. Peter, although I am a great 
sinner, yet I have not denied Christ my Saviour, as you 
did. In such instances the forgiveness of sins remains 
confirmed. And although the apostles were sinners, yet our 
Saviour Christ always excused them, as when they plucked 
the ears of corn; but, on the contrary, he jeered the Pharisees 
touching the paying of tribute, and commonly showed his 
disapprobation of them; but the disciples he always com- 
forted, as Peter, where he says: "Fear not, thou shalt hence- 
forth catch men." 

CCL. 

No sinner can escape his punishment, unless he be sorry 
for his sins. For though one go scot-free for awhile, yet at 
last he will be snapped, as the Psalm says: "God indeed 
is still judge on earth." 

Our Lord God suffers the ungodly to be surprised and 
taken captive in very slight and small things, when they 
think not of it, when they are most secure, and live in 
delight and pleasure, leaping for joy. In such manner was 
the Pope surprised by me, about his indulgences and pardons, 
comparatively a slight matter. 

CCLI. 

A magistrate, a father or mother, a master or dame, 
tradesmen and others, must now and then look through the 
fingers at their citizens, children, and servants, if their faults 
and oiFences be not too gross and frequent; for where we 
will have summum jus^ there follows often summa injuria^ 

T 



114 Luther's table-talk. 

so that all must go to wreck. Neither do they which are in 
office always hit it aright, but err and sin themselves, and 
must therefore desire the forgiveness of sins. 

God forgives sins merely out of grace for Christ's sake; 
but we must not abuse the grace of God. God has given 
signs and tokens enough, that our sins shall be forgiven; 
namely, the preaching of the gospel, baptism, the Lord's 
Supper, and the Holy Ghost in our hearts. 

Now it is also needful we testify in our works that we 
have received the forgiveness of sins, by each forgiving the 
faults of his brother. There is no comparison between God's 
remitting of sins and ours. For what are one hundred 
pence, in comparison of ten thousand pounds? as Christ 
says, nought. And although we deserve nothing by our 
forgiving, yet we must forgive, that thereby we may prove 
and give testimony that we from God have received forgive- 
jiess of our sins. 

The forgiveness of sins is declared only in God's Word, 
and there we must seek it; for it is grounded on God's 
promises. God forgives thee thy sins, not because thou 
feelest them and art sorry, for this sin itself produces, with- 
out deserving, but he forgives thy sins because he is mer- 
ciful, and because he has promised to forgive for Christ's 
sake. 

CCLII. 

When God said to Cain, through Adam: " If thou do well, 
shalt thou not be accepted? And if thou dost not well, sin 
lieth at the door," he shows the appearance of sinners, and 
speaks with Cain as with the most hypocritical and poisonous 
Capuchin: 'twas as if Adam had said: Thou hast heard how 
it went with me in Paradise; I also would willingly have hid 
my offence with fig leaves, lurking behind a tree, but know, 
good fellow, our Lord God will not be so deceived; the fig 
leaves would not serve the turn. 

Ah! it was, doubtless, to Adam, a heart-breaking and 
painful task, when he was compelled to banish and pro- 
scribe his first-born and only son, to hunt him out of his 
house, and to say: Depart from me, and come no more in my 
sight; I still feel what I have already lost in Paradise, I will 
lose no more for thy sake; I will now, with more diligence, 



OF SINS. 115 

take heed to my God's commands. And no doubt Adam 
afterwards preached with redoubled diligence. 

CCLIII. 

These two sins, hatred and pride, deck and trim themselves 
out, as the devil clothed himself, in the Godhead. Hatred 
will be godlike; pride will be truth. These two are right 
deadly sins: hatred is killing; pride is lying. 

CCLIV 

It can be hurtful to none to acknowledge and confess his 
sins. Hast thou done this or that sin? — what then? We 
freely, in God's name, acknowledge the same, and deny it 
not, but from our hearts say: O Lord God! I have done 
this sin. 

Although thou hast not committed this or that sin, yet, 
nevertheless, thou art an ungodly creature; and if thou hast 
not done that sin which another has done, so has he not 
committed that sin which thou hast done; therefore cry quits 
one with another. 'Tis as the man said, that had young 
wolves to sell; he was asked which of them was the best? 
He answered: If one be good, then they are all good; they 
are all like one another. If thou hast been a murderer, an 
adulterer, a drunkard, &c., so have I been a blasphemer of 
God, who for the space of fifteen years was a friar, and 
blasphemed God with celebrating that abominable idol, the 
mass. It had been better for me I had been a partaker of 
other great wickednesses instead; but what is done cannot 
be undone; he that has stolen, let him henceforward steal no 
more. 

CCLV. 

The sins of common, untutored people are nothing in 
comparison with the sins committed by great and high per- 
sons, that are in spiritual and temporal offices. 

What are the sins done by a poor wretch, that according 
to law and justice is hanged, or the offences of a poor 
strumpet, compared with the sins of a false teacher, who daily 
makes away with many poor people, and kills them both 
body and soul? The sins committed against the first table of 
God's ten commandments, are not so much regarded by the 
world, as those committed against the second table, 

i2 



116 Luther's table-talk. 

CCLVI. 

Original sin, after regeneration, is like a wound tliat 
begins to heal; though it be a wound, yet it is in course of 
healing, though it still runs and is sore. 

So original sin remains in Christians until they die, yet 
itself is mortified and continually dying. Its head is crushed 
in pieces, so that it cannot condemn us. 

CCLVII. 

All natural inclinations are either without God or against 
him; therefore none are good. I prove it thus: All affec- 
tions, desires, and inclinations of mankind are evil, wicked, 
and spoiled, as the Scripture says. 

Experience testifies this; for no man is so virtuous as to 
marry a wife, only thereby to have children, to love and to 
bring them up in the fear of God. 

No hero undertakes great enterprises for the common 
good, but out of ambition, for which he is justly condemned: 
hence it must needs follow. That such original, natui-al 
desires and inclinations are wicked. But God bears with 
them and lets them pass, in those that believe in Christ. 

CCLVIII. 

Schenck proceeds in a most monstrous manner, haranguing, 
without the least discernment, on the subject of sin. I, my- 
self, have heard him say, in the pulpit at Eisenach, without 
any qualification whatever, " Sin, sin is nothing; God will 
receive sinners; He himself tells us they shall enter the 
kingdom of heaven." Schenck makes no distinction between 
sins committed, sins committing, and sins to be committed, 
so that when the common people hear him say, " Sin, for God 
will receive sinners;" they very readily repeat, " Well, we'll 
sin then." 'Tis a most erroneous doctrine. What is an- 
nounced as to God's receiving sinners, applies to sinners who 
have repented; there is all the difference in the world between 
agnitum peccatum, attended by repentance, and velle peccare 
which is an inspiration of the devil. 



OF FREE-WILL 117 



OF FREE-WILL. 

CCLIX. 

The very name, Free-will, was odious to all the Fathers. 
I, for my part, admit that God gave to mankind a free will, 
but the question is, whether this same freedom be in our 
power and strength, or no? We may very fitly call it a sub- 
verted, perverse, fickle, and wavering will, for it is only God 
that works in us, and we must suffer and be subject to his 
pleasure. Even as a potter out of his clay makes a pot or 
vessel, as he wills, so it is for our free will, to suffer and not 
to w^ork. It stands not in our strength; for we are not able 
to do anything that is good in divine matters. 

CCLX. 

I have often been resolved to live uprightly, and to lead a 
true godly life, and to set everything aside that would hinder 
this, but it was far from being put in execution; even as it 
was with Peter, when he swore he would lay down his life 
for Christ. 

I will not lie or dissemble before my God, but will freely 
confess, I am not able to effect that good which I intend, but 
await the happy hour when God shall be pleased to meet me 
with his grace. 

The will of mankind is either presumptuous or despairing. 
No human creature can satisfy the law. For the law of God 
discourses with me, as it were after this manner: Here is a 
great, a high, and a steep mountain, and thou must go over 
it; whereupon my flesh and free-will say, I will go over it; 
but my conscience says. Thou canst not go over it; then 
comes despair, and says, If I cannot, then I must forbear. In 
this sort does the law work in mankind either presumption 
or despair; yet the law must be preached and taught, for if 
we preach not the law, then people grow rude and confident, 
whereas if we preach it, we make them afraid. 

CCLXI. 

Saint Augustin writes, that free-will, without God's grace 
and the Holy Ghost, can do nothing but sin; which sentence 
eorely troubles the school-divines. They say, Augustin 



118 Luther's table-talk. 

spoke hyperholice, and too much; for thej understand that 
part of Scripture to be spoken only of those people who 
lived before the deluge, which says: "And God saw that the 
wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every 
imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil conti- 
nually," &c. ; whereas He speaks in a general way, which 
these poor school-divines do not see any more than what the 
Holy Ghost says, soon after the deluge, in almost the same 
words: " And the Lord said in his heart, I will not again 
curse the ground any more for man's sake, for the imagina- 
tion of man's heart is evil from his youth." 

Hence, we conclude in general, That man, without the 
Holy Ghost and God's grace, can do nothing but sin; he pro- 
ceeds therein without intermission, and from one sin falls into 
another. Now, if man will not suffer wholesome doctrine, 
but contemns the all-saving Word, and resists the Holy 
Ghost, then through the effects and strength of his free-will 
he becomes God's enemy; he blasphemes the Holy Ghost, 
and follows the lusts and desires of his own heart, as exam- 
ples in all times clearly show. 

But we must diligently weigh the words which the Holy 
Ghost speaks through Moses: " Every imagination of the 
thoughts of his heart is evil continually:" so that what a man 
is able to conceive with liis thoughts, with his understanding 
and free-will, by highest diligence, is evil, and not once or 
twice, but evil continually; without the Holy Ghost, man's 
reason, will, and understanding, are without the knowledge 
of God; and to be without the knowledge of God, is nothing 
else than to be ungodly, to walk in darkness, and to hold that 
for best which is direct worst. 

I speak only of that which is good in divine things, and 
according to the holy Scripture; for we must make a differ- 
ence between that which is temporal, and that which is 
spiritual, between politics and divinity; for God also allows 
of the government of the ungodly, and rewards their virtues, 
yet only so far as belongs to this temporal life ; for man's will 
and understanding conceive that to be good which is exter- 
nal and temporal — nay, take it to be, not only good, but the 
chief good. 

But when we divines speak of free-will, we ask what man's 
free-will is able to accomplish in divine and spiritual matters, 
not in outward and temporal affairs: and we conclude that 



OF FREE-WILL. 119 

man, without the Holy Ghost, is altogether wicked before 
God, although he were decked up and trimmed with all the 
virtues of the heathen, and had all their works. 

For, indeed, there are fair and glorious examples in heathen- 
dom, of many virtues, where men were temperate, chaste, 
bountiful; loved their country, parents, wives, and children; 
were men of courage, and behaved themselves magnanimously 
and generously. 

But the ideas of mankind concerning God, the true wor- 
ship of God, and God's will, are altogether stark blindness 
and darkness. For the light of human wisdom, reason, and 
understanding, which alone is given to man, comprehends 
only what is good and profitable outwardly. And although 
we see that the heathen philosophers now and then discoursed 
touching God and his wisdom very pertinently, so that some 
have made prophets of Socrates, of Xenophon, of Plato, &c., 
yet, because they knew not that God sent his son Christ to 
save sinners, such fair, glorious, and wise-seeming speeches 
and disputations are nothing but mere blindness and igno- 
rance. 

CCLXII 

Ah, Lord God! why should we boast of our free-will, as if 
it were able to do anything ever so small, in divine and 
spiritual matters? when we consider what horrible miseries 
the devil has brought upon us through sin, we might shame 
ourselves to death. 

For, first, free-will led us into original sin, and brought 
death upon us: afterwards, upon sin followed not only death, 
but all manner of mischiefs, as we daily find in the world, 
murder, lying, deceiving, stealing, and other evils, so that 
no man is safe the twinkling of an eye, in body or goods, but 
always stands in danger. 

And, besides these evils, is afflicted with yet a greater, as 
is noted in the gospel — namely, that he is possessed of the 
devil, who makes him mad and raging. 

We know not rightly what we became after the fall of our 
first parents; what from our mothers we have brought with 
us. For we have altogether a confounded, corrupt, and 
poisoned nature, both in body and soul; throughout the whole 
of man is nothing that is good. 

This is my absolute opinion: he that will maintain that 



120 Luther's table-talk. 

man's free-will is able to do or work anything in spiritual 
cases, be they never so small, denies Christ. This I have 
always maintained in my writings, especially in those against 
Erasmus, one of the learnedest men in the w^hole world, and 
thereby will I remain, for T know it to be the truth, though 
all the world should be against it; yea, the decree of Divine 
Majesty must stand fast against the gates of hell. 

I confess that mankind has a free-will, but it is to milk 
kine, to build houses, &c., and no further: for so long as a 
man is at ease and in safety, and is in no want, so long he 
thinks he has a free-will, which is able to do something; but 
when want and need appear, so that there is neither meat, 
drink, nor money, where is then free-will? It is utterly lost, 
and cannot stand when it comes to the pinch. Faith only 
stands fast and sure, and seeks Christ. Therefore faith is 
far another thing than free-will; nay, free-will is nothing at 
all, but faith is all in all. Art thou bold and stout, and canst 
thou carry it lustily with thy free-will when plague, wars, 
and times of dearth and famine are at hand? 'No: in time of 
plague, thou knowest not what to do for fear; thou wishest 
thyself a hundred miles off. In time of dearth thou thinkest: 
Where shall I find to eat? Thy will cannot so much as 
give thy heart the smallest comfort in these times of need, 
but the longer thou strivest, the more it makes thy heart 
faint and feeble, insomuch that it is affrighted even at the 
rushing and shaking of a leaf. These are the valiant acts 
our free-will can achieve. 

CCLXIII. 

Some new divines allege, that the Holy Ghost works not 
in those that resist him, but only in such as are willing and 
give consent thereto, whence it would appear that free-wnll is 
also a cause and helper of faith, and that consequently faith 
alone justifies not, and that the Holy Ghost does not alone 
work through the word, but that our w^ill does something 
therein. 

But I say it is not so; the will of mankind works nothing 
at all in his conversion and justification; jVo?i est efficiens 
causa justificationis sed materialis tantum. It is the matter 
on which the Holy Ghost works (as a potter makes a pot out 
of clay), equally in those that resist and are averse, as in 
St. Paul. But after the Holy Ghost has wrought in the 



.^ OF FREE-WILL. 121 

wills of such resistants, then he also manages that the will be 
consenting thereunto. 

Thej say and allege further, That the example of St. Paul's 
conversion is a particular and special work of God, and 
therefore cannot be brought in for a general rule. I answer: 
even like as St. Paul was converted, just so are all others 
converted; for we all resist God, but the Holy Ghost draws 
the will of mankind, when he pleases, through preaching. 

Even as no man may lawfully have children, except in a 
state of matrimony, though many married people have no 
children, so the Holy Ghost works not always through the 
word but when it pleases him, so that free-will does nothing 
inwardly in our conversion and justification before God, 
neither does it work with our strength — no, not in the least, 
unless we be prepared and made fit by the Holy Ghost. 

The sentences in Holy Scripture touching predestination, 
as, " No man can come to me except the Father draweth 
him," seem to terrify and affright us; yet they but show that 
we can do nothing of our own strength and will that is 
good before God, and put the godly also in mind to pray. 
When people do this, they may conclude they are predes- 
tinated. 

Ah! why should we boast that our free-will can do aught 
in man's conversion? We see the reverse in those poor 
people, who are corporally possessed of the devil, how he 
rends, and tears, and spitefully deals with them, and with 
what difiiculty he is driven out. Truly, the Holy Ghost 
alone must drive him out, as Christ says: "If I, with the 
finger of God, do drive out devils, then no doubt the kingdom 
of God is come upon you." As much as to say : If the king- 
dom of God shall come upon you, then the devil must first 
be driven out, for his kingdom is opposed to God's kingdom, 
as ye yourselves confess. Now the devil will not be driven, 
but by devils, much less by men, or by man's strength, but 
anly by God's spirit and power. Hence, if the devil be 
not driven out through God's finger, then the kindom of 
the devil subsists there ; and where the devil's kingdom is, 
there is not God's kingdom. 

And again, so long as the Holy Ghost comes not into us, 
we are not only unable to do anydiing good, but we are, so 
long, in the kingdom of the devil, and do what is pleasing 
unto him. 



122 Luther's table-talk. 

What could St. Paul have done to be freed from the devil, 
though all the people on earth had been present to help him? 
Truly, nothing at all; he was forced to do and suffer that 
which the devil, his lord and master, pleased until our 
blessed Saviour Christ came, with divine power. 

Now, if he could not be quit of the devil, corporally from 
his body, how should he be quit of him spiritually from his 
soul, through his own will, strength, and power? For the 
soul was the cause why the body was possessed, which also 
was a punishment for sin. It is a matter more difficult to 
be delivered from sin than from the punishment; the soul 
is always heavier possessed than the body; the devil leaves 
to the body its natural strength and activity; but the soul he 
bereaves of understanding, reason, and power as we see in 
possessed people. 

Let us mark how Christ pictures forth the devil. He 
names him a strong giant that keeps a castle; that is, the 
devil has not only the world in possession, as his own king- 
dom, but he fortifies it in such a way that no human creature 
can take it from him, and he keeps it also in such subor- 
dination that he does even what he wills to have done. 
Now, as much as a castle is able to defend itself against the 
tyrant which is therein, even so niuch is free-will and human 
strength able to defend itself against the devil; that is, no 
way able at all. And even as the castle, must first be over- 
come by a stronger giant, to be won from the tyrant, even so 
mankind must be delivered and regained from the devil 
through Christ. Hereby, we see plainly that our doings and 
righteousness can help nothing towards our deliverance, but 
only by God's grace and power. 

O ! how excellent and comfortable a gospel is that, in which 
our Saviour Christ shows what a loving heart he bears 
towards us poor sinners, who are able to do nothing at all 
for ourselves to our salvation. 

For as a silly sheep cannot take heed to itself, that it err 
not, nor go astray, unless the shepherd always leads it; yea, 
and when it has erred, gone astray, and is lost, cannot find 
the right way, nor come to the shepherd, but the shepherd 
must go after it, and seek until he find it, and when he has 
found it, must carry it, to the end it be not scared from 
him again, go astray, or be torn by the wolf: so neither 



OF FREE-WILL. 123 

can we help ourselves, nor attain a peaceful ccnscience, 
nor outrun the devil, death, and hell, unless Christ him 
self seek and call us through his Word; and when we are 
come unto him, and possess the true faith, yet we of our- 
selves are not able to keep ourselves therein, nor to stand, 
unless he always hold us up through his Word and spirit, 
seeing that the devil everywhere lies lurking for us, like a 
roaring lion, seeking to devour us. 

I fain would know how he who knows nothing of God, 
should know how to govern himself; how he, who is 
conceived and born in sin, as we all are, and is by nature a 
child of wrath, and God's enemy, should know how to find 
the right way and to remain therein, when, as Isaiah says: 
" We can do nothing else but go astray." How is it possible 
we should defend ourselves against the devil, who is a 
Prince of this world, and we his prisoners, when, with all our 
strength, we are not able so much as to hinder a leaf or a 
fly from doing us hurt? I say, how may we poor miserable 
wretches presume to boast of comfort, help, and counsel 
against God's judgment, his wrath and everlasting death, 
when we cannot tell which way to seek help, or comfort, or 
counsel, no, not in the least of our corporal necessities, as 
daily experience teaches us, either for ourselves or others? 

Therefore, thou mayest boldly conclude, that as little as a 
sheep can help itself, but must needs wait for all assistance 
from the shepherd, so little, yea, much less, can a human 
creature find comfort, help, and advice of himself, in cases 
pertaining to salvation, but must expect and wait for these 
only from God, his shepherd, who is a thousand times more 
willing to do every good thing for his sheep than any tem- 
poral shepherd for his. 

Now, seeing that human nature, through original sin, is 
whoUy spoiled and perverted, outwardly and inwardly, in 
body and soul, where is then free-will and human strength? 
Where human traditions, and the preachers of works, who 
teach that we must make use of our own abilities, and by 
our own works obtain God's grace, and so, as they say, be 
children of salvation? O! foolish, false doctrine! — for we are 
altogethei- unprepared with our abilities, with our strength 
and works, when it comes to the combat, to stand or hold 
out. How can that man be reconciled to God, whom he 



124 Luther's table-talk. 

cannot endure to hear, but flies from to a human creature, 
expect ing more love and favour from one that is a sinner, 
than he does from God. Is not this a fine free-will for recon- 
ciliation and atonement^ 

The children of Israel on Mount Sinai, when God gave 
them the Ten commandments, showed plainly that human 
nature and free-will can do nothing, or subsist before God; 
for they feared that God would suddenly strike among them, 
holding him merely for a devil, a hangman, and a tormentor, 
who did nothing but fret and fume. 



OF THE CATECHISM. 



CCLXIV. 



I BELIEVE the words of the apostles' creed to be the work 
of the Holy Ghost; the Holy Spirit alone could have enun- 
ciated things so grand, in terms so precise, so expressive, so 
powerful. No human creature could have done it, nor all the 
human creatures of ten thousand worlds. This creed, then, 
should be the constant object of our most serious attention. 
For myself, I cannot too highly admire or venerate it. 

CCLXV. 

The catechism must govern the church, and remain lord 
and ruler; that is, the ten commandments, the creed, the 
Lord's prayer, the sacraments, &c. And although there be 
many that set themselves against it, yet it shall stand fast, 
and keep the pre-eminence, through him of whom it is 
written, " Thou art a priest for ever:" for he will be a 
priest, and will also have priests, despite the devil and all his 
instruments on earth. 

CCLXVI. 

Sermons very little edify children, who learn little thereby; 
it is more needful they be taught and well instructed in 
schools, and at home that they be heard and examined what 
they have learned; this way profits much; 'tis very weari- 
some, but very necessary. The papists avoid such pains, 
90 that their children are neglected and fol'saken. 



OF THE CATECHISM. 125 

CCLXVII. 

In the catechism, we have a very exact, direct, and short 
way to the whole Christian rehgion. For God himself gave 
the ten commandments, Christ himself penned and taught the 
Lord's prayer, the Holy Ghost brought together the articles 
of faith. These three pieces are set down so excellently, 
that never could anything have been better; but they are 
slighted and contemned by us as things of small value, because 
the little children daily say them. 

The catechism is the most complete and best doctrine, and 
therefore should continually be preached; all public sermons 
should be grounded and built thereupon, I could wish we 
preached it daily, and distinctly read it out of the book. But 
our preachers and hearers have it at their lingers' ends; they 
have already swallowed it all up; they are ashamed of tliis 
slight and simple doctrine, as they hold it, and will be thought 
of nigher learning. The parishioners say: Our preachers 
liddle always one tune; they preach nothing but the cate- 
chism, the ten commandments, the creed, the Lord's prayer, 
baptism, and the Lord's supper; all which we know well 
enough already, but the catechism, I insist, is the right 
Bible of the laity, wherein is contained the whole sum of 
Christian doctrine necessary to be known by every Chris- 
tian for salvation. 

First, there are the ten commandments of God, Doctrina 
Doctrinarum^ the doctrine of all doctrines, by which God's will 
is known, what God will have of us, and what is wanting 
in us. Secondly, there is the confession of faith in God and in 
our Lord Jesus Christ; Historia Historiarum, the history 
of histories, or highest history, wherein are delivered unto 
us the wonderful works of the divine Majesty from the be- 
ginning to all eternity; how we and all creatures are created 
by God; how we are delivered by the Son of God through 
his humanity, his passion, death, and resurrection; and also 
how we are renewed and collected together, the one people 
of God, and have remission of sins and everlasting life. 

Thirdly, there is the Lord's prayer, Oratio Orationum, the 
prayer above all prayers, a prayer which the most high 
Master taught us, wherein are comprehended all spiritual 
and temporal blessings, and the strongest comforts in all 
trials, temptations, and troubles, even in the hour of death. 



126 Luther's table-talk. 

Fourthly, there are the blessed sacraments, Cerimonim 
Cerimoniaritm, the highest ceremonies, which God himself 
has instituted and ordained, and therein assured us of his 
^race. We should esteem and love the catechism, for therein 
is the ancient, pure, divine doctrine of the Christian church. 
And whatsoever is contrary thereunto is new and false doc- 
trine, though it have ever so glorious a show and lustre, and 
we must take good heed how we meddle therewith. In all 
my youth I never heard any preaching, either of the ten 
commandments, or of the Lord's prayer. 

^ Future heresies will darken this light, but now we have 
the catechism, God be praised, purer in the pulpits, than has 
been for the last thousand years. So much could not be 
collected out of all the books of the fathers, as, by God's 
grace, is now taught out of the little catechism. I only read in 
the Bible at Erfurt, in the monastery; and God then wonder- 
fully wrought, contrary to all human expectation, so that I was 
constrained to depart from Erfurt, and was called to Witten- 
berg, where, under God, I gave the devil, the pope of Rome, 
such a blow, as no emperor, king, or potentate could have 
given him; yet it was not I, but God by me, his poor, weak, 
and unworthy instrument. 

CCLXVIII. 

The Decalogue — that is, the ten commandments of God, 
are a looking glass and brief sum of all virtues and doctrines, 
both how we ought to behave towards God and also towards 
our neighbour; that is, towards all mankind. 

There never w%as at any time written a more excellent, 
complete, or compendious book of virtues. 

CCLXIX. 

God says: " I the Lord thy God am a jealous God." Now, 
God is jealous two manner of ways; first, God is angry as 
one that is jealous of them that fall from him, and become 
false and treacherous, that prefer the creature before the 
Creator; that build upon the favours of the great; that de- 
pend upon their friends, upon their own power — riches, 
arts, wisdom, &c.; that forsake the righteousness of faith, 
and contemn it, and will be justified and saved by and 
through their own good works. God is also vehemently angry 
v/ilh those that boast and brag of their power and strength; as 
WK see in Sennacherib, king of Assyria, who boasted of his 



OF THE CATECHISM. 127 

great power, and thought utterly to destroy Jerusalem. Like- 
wise in king Saul, who also thought to defend and keep the 
kingdom through his strength and power, and to pass it on 
to his children, when he had suppressed David and rooted him 
out. 

Secondly, God is jealous for them that love him and highly 
esteem his word; such God loves again, defends, and keeps 
as the apple of his eye, and resists their adversaries, beating 
them back, that they are not able to perform what they in- 
tended. Therefore, this word jealous comprehends both 
hatred and love, revenge and protection; for which cause it 
requires both fear and faith; fear, that we provoke not God 
to anger, or work his displeasure; faith, that in trouble we 
believe he will help, nourish, and defend us in this life, and 
will pardon and forgive us our sins, and for Christ's sake 
preserve us to life everlasting. For faith must rule and go- 
vern, in and over all things, both spiritual and temporal; the 
heart must believe most certainly that God looks upon us, 
loves, helps, and will not forsake us, as the Psalm says: " Call 
upon me in the time of trouble, so will I deliver thee, and 
thou shalt praise me," 8ic. Also, " The Lord is nigh unto 
all those that call upon him; yea, all that call upon him faith- 
fully." And, " He that calleth upon the name of the Lord, 
shall be saved." 

Further, the Lord says: " And will visit the sins of the 
fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth genera- 
tion," &c. This is a terrible word of threatening, which justly 
affrights our hearts, and stirs up fear in us. It is quite con- 
trary to our reason, for we conceive it to be a very unjust pro- 
ceeding, that the children and posterity should be punished for 
their fathers and forefathers' offences. But forasmuch as God 
has so decreed, and is pleased so to proceed, therefore our duty 
is to know and acknowledge that he is a just God, and that he 
wrongs none. Seeing that these fearful threatenings are con- 
trary to our understanding, therefore flesh and blood regard 
them not, but cast them in the wind, as though they signified 
no more than the hissing of a goose. But we that are true 
Christians believe the same to be certain, v/hen the Holy 
Ghost touches our hearts, and that this proceeding is just and 
right, and thereby we stand in the fear of God. Here again 
we may see what man's free-will can do, in that it under- 
stands and fears nothing. If we did but feel and know how 



128 Luther's table-talk. 

earnest a threatening this is, we should for fear instantly fall 
down dead; and we have examples, as where God said: that 
for the sins of Manasseh he will cast the people into miserable 
captivity. 

But some may argue: Then I see well that the posterity 
have no hope of grace when their parents sin. I answer: 
Those that repent, from them is the law taken away and 
abolished, so that their parents' sins do not hurt them: as 
the prophet Ezekiel says: " The son shall not bear the ini- 
quity of the father;" yet God permits the external and cor- 
poral punishment to go on, yea, sometimes over the penitent 
children also for examples, to the end that others may fly 
from sin and lead a godly life. 

" But he will do good, and be merciful unto thousands," &c. 
This is a great, a glorious, and comfortable promise, far sur- 
passing all human reason and understanding, that, for the sake 
of one godly person, so many should be partakers of undeserved 
blessings and mercies. For we find many examples, that a mul- 
titude of people have enjoyed mercies and benefits for the sake 
of one godly man; as for Abraham's sake, many people were 
preserved and blessed, as also for Isaac's sake; and for the 
sake of Naaman the whole kingdom of Assyria was blessed 
of God. 

To love God is, that we certainly hold and believe that 
God is gracious unto us, that he helps, assists, and does us 
good. Therefore, love proceeds from faith, and God requires 
faith, to believe that he promises all good unto us. 

CCLXX. 

The first commandment will stand and remain, that God 
is our God; this will not be accomplished in the present, but 
in the life everlasting. All the other commandments will 
cease and end; for, in the life to come, the world will cease 
and end together with all external worship of God, all world 
policy and government; only God and the first commandment 
will remain everlastingly, both here and there. 

We ought well to mark with what great diligence and ability 
Moses handles the first commandment, and explains it. He 
was doubtless, an excellent doctor. David afterw^ards was a 
gate or a door out of Moses. For he had well studied in 
Moses, and so he became a fijie poet and orator; the 



OF THE LAW AN'D THE GOSPEL. 129 

Ppalms are altogether sijllogisjns, or concluding sentences out 
cf the first commandment. Major, the first, is God's Word 
itself; Minor, the second, faith. The conclusion is the act, 
work, and execution, so that it is done, as we believe. As, 
Major : 3Iisericors Deus, respicit miseros ; Minor : Ego sum 
miser ; Conclusio ; Ergo Deus me quoque respicit 

When we believe the first commandment, and so please 
God, then all our actions are pleasing unto him. If thou 
hearest his Word, if thou prayest, mortifiest thyself, then 
says God unto thee; I am well pleased with what thou doest. 
Moreover, when we observe the first commandment, then 
that placet goes through all the other commandments and 
works. Art thou a Christian? wilt thou marry a wife? wilt 
thou buy and sell? wilt thou labour in the works of thy 
vocation? wilt thou punish and condemn wicked and un- 
godly wretches? wilt thou eat, drink, sleep? &c. God says 
continually; Placet. 

But if thou keepest not the first commandment, then says 
God to all thy works and actions, Non placent, they please 
me not. Christ takes the first commandment upon himself, 
where he says: "He that honoureth me, honoureth the 
Father; he that honoureth not the Sou, honoureth not the 
Father." 



OF THE LAW AND THE GOSPEL. 

CCLXXI. 

We must reject those who so highly boast of Moses's 
laws, as to temporal affairs, for we have our written imperial 
and country laws, under which we live, and unto which we 
are sworn. Neither Naaman the Assyrian, nor Job, nor 
Joseph, nor Daniel, nor many other good and godly Jews, 
observed Moses's laws out of their country, but those of the 
Gentiles among whom they lived. 

Moses's laws bound and obliged only the Jews in that 
place which God made choice of. Now they are free. If we 
should keep and observe the laws and rites of Moses, we 
must also be circumcised, and keep the Mosaical ceremonies; 



130 Luther's table-talk. 

for there is no difference; he that holds one to be necessary, 
must hold the rest so too. Therefore let us leave Moses 
to his laws, excepting only the Moralia, which God has 
planted in nature, as the ten commandments, which concern 
God's true worshipping and service, and a civil life. 

CCLXXII. 

The particular and only office of the law is, as St. Paul 
teaches, that transgressions thereby should be acknowledged; 
for it was added, because of transgressions, till the seed 
should come, to whom the promise was made. These are 
the express and plain words of St. Paul; therefore we 
trouble not ourselves with what the papists allege to the 
contrary, and spin out of human reason, extolling the main- 
tainers and seeming observers of Moses's law. 

CCLXXIII. 

God gives to the emperor the sword, the emperor delivers 
it to the judge, and causes thieves, murderers, &c,, to be 
punished and executed. Afterwards, when God pleases, he 
takes the sword from the emperor again; even so does God 
touching the law ; he leaves it to the devil, and permits him 
therewith to affright sinners. 

CCLXXIV. 

The law is used two Avays: first, for this worldly life, 
because God has ordained all temporal laws and statutes to 
prevent and hinder sin. But here some one may object: If 
the law hinder sin, then it also justifies. I answer: Oh! no, 
this does not follow; that I do not murder, commit adultery, 
steal, &c., is not because I love virtue and righteousness, but 
because I fear the hangman, w^ho threatens me with the 
gallows, sword, &c. It is the hangman that hinders me from 
sinning, as chains, ropes, and strong bands hinder bears, 
lions, and other wild beasts from tearing and rending in 
pieces all that come in their way. 

Hence we may understand. That the same can be no 
righteousness that is performed out of fear of the curse, but 
sin and unrighteousness; for the law binds mankind, who by 
nature are prone to wickedness, that they do not sin, as 
willingly they would. 

Therefore this is the first point concerning the law, that it 



OF THE LAW AND THE GOSPEL. 131 

must be used to deter the ungodly from their wicked and 
mischievous intentions. For the devil, who is an abbot and 
prince of" this world, allures people to work all manner of sin 
and wickedness; wherefore God has ordained magistrates, 
elders, schoolmasters, laws and statutes, to the end, if they 
can do no more, that at least they may bind the claws of the 
devil, and hinder him from raging and swelling so powerfully 
in those who are his, according to his will and pleasure. 

Secondly, we use the law spiritually, as thus: To make 
transgressions seem greater, as St. Paul says, or to reveal 
and discover to people their sins, blindness, and ungodly 
doings, wherein they were conceived and born; namely, that 
they are ignorant of God, and are his enemies, and therefore 
have justly deserved death, hell, God's judgments, his ever- 
lasting wrath and indignation. But the hypocritical sophists in 
universities know nothing thereof, neither do those who are of 
opinion that they are justified by the law and their own works. 

But to the end that God might put to silence, smother, 
suppress, and beat down to the ground these mischievous and 
furious beasts, he has appointed and ordained a particular 
Hercules with a club, powerfully to lay hold on such beasts, 
take them captive, strike them down, and so despatch them 
out of the way; that is, he gave the law upon the hill of 
Sinai, with such fearful thundering and lightning, that all 
people thereat were amazed and affrighted. 

It is exceeding necessary for us to know this use of the 
law. For he that is not an open and a public murderer, an 
adulterer, or a thief, holds himself to be an upright and godly 
man; as did the Pharisee, so blinded and possessed spiritually 
of the devil, that he could neither see nor feel his sins, nor 
his miserable case, but exalted himself touching his good 
works and deserts. Such hypocrites and haughty saints can 
God by no better means humble and soften, than by and through 
the law; for that is the right club or hammer, the thunder-clap 
from heaven, the axe of God's wrath, that strikes through, beats 
down, and batters such stock-blind, hardened hypocrites. 
For this cause, it is no small matter that we should rightly 
understand what the law is, whereto it serves, and what is its 
proper work and office. We do not reject the law and the 
works thereof, but, on the contrary, confirm them, and teach 
that we ought to do good works, and that the law is very good 

K 2 



132 Luther's table-talk. 

and profitable, if we merely give it its right, and keep it to 
its own proper work and office. 

The law opens not nor makes visible God's grace and 
mercy, or the righteousness whereby we obtain everlasting 
life and salvation; but our sins, our weakness, death, God's 
wrath and judgment. 

The light of the gospel is a far different manner of light, en- 
lightening affrighted, broken, sorrowful, and contrite hearts, 
and reviving, comforting, and refreshing them. For it declares 
that God is merciful to unworthy, condemned sinners, for the 
sake of Christ, and that a blessing thereby is presented unto 
them who believe; that is, o;race, remission of sins, righteous- 
ness, and everlasting life. 

When in this way we distinguish the law and the gospel, 
then we attribute and give to each its right work and 
office. Therefore, I pray and admonish all lovers of godli- 
ness and pure religion, especially those who in time are to be 
teachers of others, that with highest diligence they study this 
matter, which I much fear, after our time, will be darkened 
again, if not altogether extinguished. 

CCLXXV. 

Never was a bolder, harsher sermon preached in the world 
than that wherein St. Paul abolished Moses and his law, as 
insufficient for a sinner's salvation. 

Hence the continual dissension and strife which this apostle 
had with the Jews. And if Moses had not cashiered and put 
himself out of his office, with these words: "The Lord thy 
God will raise up unto thee another prophet out of thy 
brethren, him shalt thou hear;" who then would or could 
have believed the gospel, and forsaken Moses? 

Hence the vehement accusation brought by the worthy 
Jews, who suborned certain men to accuse the beloved 
Stephen, saying: "We have heard him speak blasphemous 
words against Moses and against God." Likewise, "This 
man ceaseth not to speak blasphemous words against the holy 
place and the law," &c. For to preach and teach that the 
observing of the law was not necessary to salvation, was to the 
Jews as horrible, as though one should stand up and preach 
among us Christians : Christ is not the Lamb of God, that 
taketh away the sins of the world. vSt. Paul could have been 
CO utent they had kept and observed the law, had they not 



OF THE LAW AND THE GOSPEL. 133 

asserted it was necessary to salvation. But the Jews would 
no more endure this, than the papists, with their fopperies, 
will now endure that we hold and observe the ceremonies, so 
that every one shall be at liberty either to observe or not 
observe them, according as occasion serves, and that the 
conscience therein may not be bound or ensnared, and that 
God's Word freely be preached and taught. But Jews and 
papists are ungodly wretches; they are two stockings made 
of one piece of cloth. 

CCLXXVL 

Moses with his law is most terrible ; there never was any 
equal to him in perplexing, affrighting, tyrannizing, threaten- 
ing, preaching, and thundering; for he lays sharp hold on the 
conscience, and fearfully works it, but all by God's express 
command. When we are affrighted, feeling our sins, God's 
wrath and judgments, most certainly, in the law is no justifi- 
cation; therein is nothing celestial and divine, but 'tis al- 
together of the world, which world is the kingdom of the 
devil. Therefore it is clear and apparent that the law can do 
nothing that is vivifying, saving, celestial, or divine; what it 
does is altogether temporal; that is, it gives us to know what 
evil is in the world, outwardly and inwardly. But, besides 
this, the Holy Ghost must come over the law, and speak 
thus in thy heart : God will not have thee affright thyself to 
death, only that through the law thou shouldest know thy 
misery, and yet not despair, but believe in Christ, who is the 
end of the law for righteousness. 

CCLXXVII. 

St. Paul now and then speaks scornfully of the law, but 
he means not that we should contemn the law; he would 
rather we should esteem and hold it precious. But where he 
teaches how we become justified before God, it was necessary 
for him so to speak; for it is far another thing when w^e talk 
how we may be justified before God, than w4ien we talk about 
the law. When we have in hand the righteousness that justi- 
fies before God, we cannot too much disdain or undervalue 
the law. 

The conscience must have regard to nothing but Christ; 
wherefore we must, with all diligence, endeavour to remove 
Moses with his law far from us out of sight, when we intend 
to stand justified before God. 



134 Luther's table-talk. 

cclxxviii. 

It is impossible for thy human strength, whosoever thou 
art, without God's assistance, when Moses sets upon thee with 
his law, accuses and threatens thee with Grod's wrath and death, 
to possess such peace as if no law or sin had ever been. 

When thou feelest the terror of the law, thou majest say 
thus: Madam Law! I have no time to hear you speak; your 
language is very rough and unfriendly; I would have you 
know that your reign is over, therefore I am now free, I will 
endure your bondage no longer. When we thus address the 
law, we shall find the dilEference between the law of grace and 
the law of thundering Moses; and how great a divine and 
celestial gift it is to hope against hope, when there seems 
nothing to hope for; and how true the speech of St. Paul is, 
where he says: "Through faith in Christ we are justified, 
and not through the works of the law." When, indeed, 
justification is not the matter in hand, we ought highly to 
esteem the law, extol it, and with St. Paul, call it good, true, 
spiritual, and divine, as in truth it is. 

God will keep his Word through the writing-pen upon 
earth; the divines are the heads or quills of the pens, the 
lawyers the stumps. If the world will not keep the heads 
and quills, that is, if they will not hear the divines, they must 
keep the stumps, that is, they must hear the lawyers, who 
will teach them manners. 

CCLXXIX. 

I will have none of Moses with his law, for he is an enemy 
to my Lord and Saviour Christ. If Moses will go to law with 
me, I will give him his despatch, and say: Here stands Christ. 

At the day of judgment Moses will doubtless look upon 
me, and say: Thou didst understand me rightly, and didst well 
distinijuish between me and the law of faith; therefore we are 
now friends. 

We must reject the law when it seeks to affright the con- 
science, and when we feel God's anger against our sins, then 
we must eat, drink, sleep, and be cheerful, to spite the devil. 
But human wisdom is more inclined to understand the law of 
Moses, than the law of the gospel. Old Adam will not out. 

Together with the law, Satan torments the conscience by 
picturing Christ before our eyes, as an angry and stern judge, 
saying: God is an enemy to sinners, for he is a just God; 



OF THE LAW AND THE GOSPEL. 135 

thou art a sinner, therefore God is thy enemy. Hereat is the 
conscience dejected, beaten down, and taken captive. Now 
he that can make a true difference in this case, will say: 
Devil! thou art deceived, it is not so as thou pretendest; for 
God is not an enemy to all sinners, but only to the ungodly 
and impenitent sinners and persecutors of his word. For 
even as sin is two -fold, even so is righteousness two-fold also. 

CCLXXX. 

Two learned men came to me, and asked whether the law 
of God revealed sin to people without the particular motion 
of the Holy Ghost? the one affirming that it was so, the other 
denying it. The first would prove his opinion out of St. Paul, 
where he says: "By the law is the knowledge of sin:" but 
the other alleged, that this was the work and office of the 
Holy Ghost through the law; for many heard the preaching 
of the law, and yet did not acknowledge their sins. 

I answered them: Ye are both in the right if ye well under- 
stood one another; your ditference consists only in words; 
for the law must be understood two manner of ways; first, as 
a law described and heard; when it reveals not the strength or 
the sting of sin, it goes in at one ear and out at the other; it 
neither touches nor strikes the heart at all. 

Secondly, when the law is taught, and the Holy Ghost 
comes thereunto, touches the heart, and gives strength to the 
word, and the heart confesses sin, feeb God's wrath, and 
says: Ah! this concerns me; I have sinned against God, and 
have offended. Then the law has well and rightly finished its 
work and office. 

After these came a third, and said: 'tis one matter to be 
simply a law, and another to be God's law; for the law of God 
must always have its operation and strength, which the law of 
man has not. To him I made this answer: 

The law must be distinguished, understood, and divided 
three-fold: first, a written law, second, a verbal, third, a 
spiritual law. The written law, which is written in the book, 
is like a block, which, without motion, remains lying; that law 
does nothing except we read therein. The verbal law reveals 
and shows sin; yea, in the ungodly; for when adulterers hear 
the seventh commandment, " Thou shalt not commit adul- 
tery," then they understand that this reproves them; but 
they either contemn it, or else they persecute those by whom 



136 Luther's table-ta^k. 

they are reproved. But the spiritual law cannot be without 
the motion of the Holy Ghost, which touches the heart, and 
moves it, so that a man not only ceases to persecute, but has 
sorrow for sins committed, and desires to be better. 

The same person urged: St. Paul says, that the word 
works in the hearers; I answered: the word which in that 
place St. Paul speaks of, must be understood of the gospel; 
for even that word, whether written or verbal, taught or 
preached, does nothing without the Holy Ghost, which must 
kindle it in their hearts, reviving and strengthening them. 

CCLXXXI. 

Every law or commandment contains two profitable points; 
first, a promise ; second, a threatening ; for every law is, or 
should be, good, upright, and holy, Rom. vii. It commands 
that which is good, and forbids that which is evil: it rewards and 
defends thegood and godly, but punishes and resists the wicked; 
as St. Paul says: " Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to 
the evil. Wilt thou then not be afraid of the power? do that 
which is good." And St. Peter: " For the punishment of evil- 
doers, and for the praise of them that do well." And the impe- 
rial laws teach the same. Now, seeing there are promises and 
threatenings in temporal laws, how much more so are they 
fitting in God's laws, which require upright faith. The empe- 
ror's laws, indeed, require faith, true or feigned; for those who 
do not fear or believe that the emperor will punish or protect, 
observe not his laws, as vve see, but those observe them that fear 
and believe, whether from the heart or not. Now, where in 
Scripture there is a promise without the law, there faith only 
is necessary: as, when Abraham was promised that his seed 
should multiply as the stars of heaven; he was not commanded 
at that time to accomplish any work, but he heard of a work 
which God would accomplish, and which he himself was not 
able to do. Thus is Christ promised unto us, and is described 
to have done a work which we cannot do; therefore in this 
case, faith is needful for us, because by works we cannot 
take hold thereof. 

CCLXXXII. 

The law, with its righteousness, is like a cloud without rain, 
which promises rain but gives none; even so does the law 
promise salvation, but gives it not, for the law was not as- 
signed to that end, as St. Paul says, Gal. iii. 



OF THE LAW AND THE COSPEL. 137 

CCLXXXIII. 

The gospel preaches nothing of the merit of works; he that 
sa^s the gospel requires works for salvation, I say, flat and 
plain, is a liar. 

Nothing that is properly good proceeds out of the works 
of the law, unless grace be present; for what we are forced to 
do, goes not from the heart, nor is acceptable. The people 
under Moses were always in a murmuring state, would fain 
have stoned him, and were rather his enemies than his friends. 

CCLXXXIV. 

He that will dispute with the devil out of the law, will 
be beaten and taken captive; but he that disputes with 
him out of the gospel, conquers him. The devil has 
the written bond against us; therefore, let no man presume to 
dispute with him of the law or of sin. When the devil says 
to me: behold, much evil proceeds from thy doctrine, then I 
say to him: much good and profit come also from it. O! re- 
plies the devil, that is nothing to the purpose. The devil is 
an artful orator; he can make out of a mote a beam, and 
falsify that which is good; he was never in all his life so angry 
and vexed as he is now; I feel him well. 

If baptism, if the sacrament, if the gospel be false, and if 
Christ be not in heaven and governs not, then indeed I am 
in the wrong; but if these are of God's instituting and ordain- 
ing, and if Christ is in heaven and rules, then I am sure that 
the cause I have in hand is good; for what I teach and do 
openly in the church is altogether of the gospel, of baptism, of 
the Lord's supper, of prayer, &c. Christ and his gospel are 
here present; therein I must and will continue. 

CCLXXXV. 

If we diligently mark the world, we shall find that it is go- 
verned merely by its conceited opinions; sophistry, hypocrisy, 
and tyranny rule it; the upright, pure, and clear divine 
word must be their handmaid, and by them controlled. 
Therefore let us beware of sophistry, which consists not 
only in a double tongue, in twisting words, which may be 
construed any way, but also blossoms and flourishes in all 
arts and vocations, and will likewise have room and place in 
religion, where it has usurped a fine, fictitious colour. 



138 Luther's table-talk. 

Nothing is more pernicious than sophistry; we are by 
nature prone to believe lies rather than truth. Few people 
know what an evil sophistry is; Plato, the heathen writer, 
made thereof a wonderful definition. For my part, I com- 
pare it with a lie, which, like a snow-ball, the more it is 
rolled, the greater it becomes. 

Therefore, I approve not of such as pervert everything, 
undervaluing and finding fault with other men's opinions, 
though they be good and sound. I like not brains that can 
dispute on both sides, and yet conclude nothing certain. 
Such sophistications are mere crafty and subtle inventions 
and contrivances, to cozen and deceive people. 

But I love an honest and well -affected mind, that seeks 
after truth simply and plainly, and goes not about with fan- 
tasies and cheating tricks. 

CCLXXXVI. 

St. Paul says : " What the law could not do, in that it was 
weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the 
likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in flesh : 
that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us," 
&c. That is, Christ is the sum of all ; he is the right, the 
pure meaning and contents of the law. Whoso has Christ, 
has rightly fulfilled the law. But to take away the law alto- 
gether, which sticks in nature, and is written in our hearts 
and born in us, is a thing impossible and against God. And 
whereas the law of nature is somewhat darker, and speaks 
only of works, therefore, Moses and the Holy Ghost more 
clearly declare and expound it, by naming those works which 
God will have us to do, and to leave undone. Hence Christ 
also says: "lam not come to destroy the law." Worldly 
people would willingly give him royal entertainment who 
could bring this to pass, and make out that Moses, through 
Christ, is quite taken away. O, then we should quickly see 
what a fine kind of life there would be in the world! But 
God forbid, and keep us from such errors, and suffer us not 
to live to see the same. 

CCLXXXVII. 

We must preach the law for the sake of the evil and 
wicked, but for the most part it lights upon the good and 



OF THE LAW AND THE GOSPEL. 139 

godly, who, althongli they need it not, except so far as may 
concern the old Adam, flesh and blood, yet accept it. The 
preaching of the gospel we must have for the sake of the 
good and godly, yet it falls among the wicked and ungodly, 
who take it to themselves, whereas it profits them not; for 
they abuse it, and are thereby made confident. It is even as 
when it rains in the water or on a desert wilderness, and, 
meantime, the good pastures and grounds are parched and 
dried up. The ungodly out of the gospel suck only a carnal 
freedom, and become worse thereby; therefore, not the 
gospel, but the law belongs to them. Even as when my little 
son John ofiends, if then I should not whip him, but call him 
to the table to me, and give him sugar-plums, thereby I 
should make him worse, yea, quite spoil him. 

The gospel is like a fresh, mild, and cool air in the extreme 
heat of summer, a solace and comfort in the anguish of the 
conscience. But as this heat proceeds from the rays of the 
sun, so likewise the terrifying of the conscience must proceed 
from the preaching of the law, to the end we may know that 
we have offended against the laws of God. 

Now, when the mind is refreshed and quickened again by 
the cool air of the gospel, then we must not be idle, lie down 
and sleep. That is, when our consciences are settled in peace, 
quieted and comforted through God's Spirit, we must prove 
our faith by such good works as God has commanded. But 
so long as Ave live in this vale of misery, we shall be plagued 
and vexed with flies, with beetles, and vermin, that is, with 
the devil, the world, and our own flesh; yet we must press 
through, and not suffer ourselves to recoil. 

CCLXXXVIII. 

In what darkness, unbelief, traditions, and ordinances of 
men we have lived, and in how many conflicts of the con- 
science Ave have been ensnared, confounded, and captivated 
under Popedom, is testified by the books of the papists, and 
by many people now living. From all which snares and 
horrors we are noAv delivered and freed by Jesus Christ and his 
gospel, and are called to the true righteousness of faith; in- 
somuch that with good and peaceable consciences we now 
believe in God the Father, Ave trust in him, and have just cause 
to boast that we have sure and certain remission of our sins 



140 LUTHER S TABLE-TALK. 

through the death of Christ Jesus, dearly bought and pur- 
chased. Who can sufficiently extol these treasures of the 
conscience, which everywhere are spread abroad, offered and 
presented merely by grace? We are now conquerors of sin, 
of the law, of death, and of the devil; freed and delivered 
from all human traditions. If we would but consider the 
tyranny of auricular confession one of the least things we 
have escaped from, we could not show ourselves sufficiently 
thankful to God for loosing us out of that one snare. When 
Popedom stood and flourished among us, then every king 
would willingly have given ten hundred thousand guilders, 
a prince one hundred thousand, a nobleman one thousand, a 
gentleman one hundred, a citizen or countryman twenty or 
ten, to have been freed from that tyranny. But now seeing 
such freedom is obtained for nothing, by grace, it is not much 
regarded, neither give we thanks to God for it. 

CCLXXXIX. 

The Old Testament is chiefly a law-book, teaching what 
we should do or not do, and showing examples and acts 
how such laws are observed and transgressed. But besides 
the law, there are certain promises and sentences of grace, 
whereby the holy patriarchs and prophets were preserved 
then, as we are now. But the New Testament is a book 
wherein is written the gospel of God's promises, and the acts 
of those that believed, and those that believed not. And it 
is an open and public preaching and declaration of Christ, 
as set down in the sentences of the Old Testament, and 
accomplished by him. And like as the proper and chief doc- 
trine of the New Testament is grace and peace, through the 
forgiveness of sins declared in Christ, so the proper and 
chief doctrine of the Old Testament is, through the law, tc- 
discover sin, and to require good works and obedience. 

We must take good heed that we make not a Moses out ot 
Christ, nor out of Christ a Moses, as often has been done. 
But where Christ and his apostles, in the gospel, give out 
commands and doctrines expounding the law, these are as 
important as the other works and benefits of Christ. Yet to 
know only gospel precepts, is not to know the gospel; but 
when the voice sounds which says, Christ is thine own, with 
life and works, with death and resurrection, with all what he 



OV THE LAW AND THE GOSPEL. 141 

is, and all he has, by this wo see that he forces not, but 
teaches amicably, saying: " Blessed are the poor," &c., " Come 
to me all ye that are weary and heavy laden," &c. And the 
apostles use the words: " I admonish," " I exhort," " I pray," 
&c. ; so that we see in every place that the gospel is not a law- 
book, but a mild preaching of Christ's merits, given to be 
our own, if we believe. 

Hence it follows that no law is given to the faithful, 
whereby they become justified before God, as St. Paul says, 
because they are already justified and saved by ftiith; but 
they show and prove their faith by their works, they confess 
and teach the gospel before people freely and undauntedly, 
and thereupon venture their lives; and whatsoever they take 
in hand, they direct to the good and profit of their neigh- 
bour, and so follow Christ's example. For, where works and 
love do not break through and appear, there faith is not. 

We must make a clear distinction; we must place the 
gospel in heaven, and leave the law on earth; we must receive 
of the gospel a heavenly and a divine righteousness; while we 
value the law as an earthly and human righteousness, and 
thus directly and diligently separate the righteousness of the 
gospel from the righteousness of the law, even as God has 
separated and distinguished heaven from earth, light from 
darkness, day from night, &c., so that the righteousness of the 
gospel be the light and the day, but the righteousness of the 
law, darkness and night. Therefore all Christians should 
learn rightly to discern the law and grace in their hearts, and 
know how to keep one from the other, in deed and in truth, 
not merely in words, as the pope and other heretics do, who 
mingle them together, and, as it were, make thereout a cake 
not fit to eat. 

ccxc. 

Augustin pictured the strength, office, and operation of the 
law, by a very fit similitude, to show, that it discovers our 
sins, and God's wrath against sin, and places them in our 
sight. " The law," says he, " is not in fault, but our evil 
and wicked nature; even as a heap of lime is still and quiet, 
until water be poured thereon, but then it begins to smoke 
and burn, not from the fault of the water, but from the na- 
ture and kind of the lime, which will not endure water; 



142 Luther's table-talk. 

whereas, if oil, instead, be poured upon it, then it lies still, 
and burns not; even so it is with the law and the gospel." 

ccxci. 

On this matter of the righteousness of the law, St. Paul 
thoroughly bestirred himself against God's professing people, 
as in Rom. ix.^ x., xi., he strives with powerful, well-based 
arguments; it produced him much sorrow of heart. 

The Jews' argument was this: Paul kept the law at Jeru- 
salem, therefore, said they, we must also keep it. Answer: 
True, Paul for a certain time kept the law, by reason of the 
weak, to win them; but, in this our time, it is not so, and 
agrees not in any way therewith; as the ancient father well 
said: Distinguish times, and we may easily reconcile the 
Scriptures together. 



OF JUSTIFICATION. 

CCXCII. 

It is impossible for a papist to understand this article: •' I 
believe the forgiveness of sins." For the papists are drowned 
in their opinions, as I also was when among them, of the 
cleaving to or inherent righteousness. 

The Scripture names the faithful, saints and people of Grod, 
It is a sin and shame that we should forget this glorious and 
comfortable name and title. But the papists are such direct 
sinners, that they will not be reckoned sinners; and again, 
they will neither be holy nor held so to be. And in this sort 
it goes on with them untoward and crosswise, so that they 
neither believe the gospel which comforts, nor the law which 
punishes. 

But here one may say: the sins which we daily commit, 
offend and anger God; how then can we be holy? Answer: 
A mother's love to her cliild is much stronger than the dis- 
taste of the scurf upon the child's head. Even so, God's love 
towards us is far stronger than our uncleanness. Therefore, 
though we be sinners, yet we lose not thereby our childhood, 
neither do we fall from grace by reason of our sins. 



OF JUSTIFICATION 143 

AnotTier may say: we sin without ceasing, and where sin 
is, there the Holy Spirit is not; therefore we are not holy, 
because the Holy Spirit is not in us, which makes holy 
Answer: The text says plainly: " The Holy Ghost shall 
glorify me." Now where Christ is, there is the Holy Spirit. 
Now Christ is in the faithful, although they have and feel, 
and confess sins, and with sorrow of heart complain thereof, 
therefore sins do not separate Christ from those that believe. 

The God of the Turks helps no longer or further, as they 
think, than as they are godly people; in like manner also the 
God of the Papists. So when Turk and Papist begin to feel 
their sins and unworthiness, as in time of trial and tempta- 
tion, or in death, then they tremble and despair. 

But a true Christian says: " I believe in Jesus Christ my 
Lord and Saviour," who gave himself for my sins, and is 
at God's right hand, and intercedes for me; fall I into sin, as, 
alas! oftentimes I do, I am sorry for it; I rise again, and 
am an enemy unto sin. So that we plainly see, the true 
Christian faith is far different from the faith and religion of 
the pope and Turk. But human strength and nature are not 
able to accomplish this true Christian faith without the Holy 
Spirit. It can do no more than take refuge in its own 
deserts. 

But he that can say: " I am a child of God through Christ, 
who is my righteousness," and despairs not, though he be 
deficient in good works, which always fail us. he believes 
rightly. But grace is so great that it amazes a human crea- 
ture, and is very difficult to be believed. Insomuch that faith 
gives the honour to God, that he can and will perform what 
he promised, namely, to make sinners righteous, Rom. iv., 
though 'tis an exceedmg hard matter to believe that God is 
merciful unto us for tJ?e sake of Christ. 0! man's heart is 
too straight and narrow to entertain or take hold of this. 

CCXCIII. 

All men, indeed, are not alike strong, so that in some 
many faults, weaknesses, and offences, are found; but these do 
not hinder them of sancirJScation, if they sin not of evil pur- 
pose and premeditation, but only out of weakness. For a 
Christian, indeed, feels XL^ lusts of the flesh, but he resists 
them, and they have not aominion over him; and although, 



LUTHER S TABLE-TALK. 

now and then, he stun? Dies and falls into sin, yet it is for- 
given him, when he rises again, and holds on to Christ, who 
will not " That the lost sheep be hunted away, but be sought 
after." 

CCXCIV. 

Why do Christians raake use of their natural wisdom and 
understanding, seeing it must be set aside in matters of faith, 
as not only not understanding them, but also as striving 
against them. 

Answer: The natural wisdom of a human creature in mat- 
ters of faith, until he be regenerate and born anew, is alto- 
gether darkness, knowing nothing in divine cases. But in a 
faithful person, regenerate and enlightened by the Holy 
Spirit, through the Word, it is a fair and glorious instrument, 
and work of God: for even as all God's gifts, natural instru- 
ments, and expert faculties, are hurtful to the ungodly, even 
so are they wholesome and saving to the good and godly. 

The understanding, through faith, receives life from faith; 
that which was dead, is made alive again; like as our bodies, 
in light day, when it is clear and bright, are better disposed, 
rise, move, walk, &c., more readily and safely than they do 
in the dark night, so it is with human reason, which strives 
not against faith, when enlightened, but rather furthers and 
advances it. 

So the tongue, which before blasphemed God, now lauds, 
extols, and praises God and his grace, as my tongue, now it 
is enlightened, is now another manner of tongue than it was 
in Popedom ; a regeneration done by the Holy Ghost through 
the Word. 

A sanctified and upright Christian says: My wife, my 
children, my art, my wisdom, my money ara wealth, help and 
avail me nothing in heaven; yet I cast them not away nor 
reject then^. when God bestows such benefits upon me, but 
part and separate the substance from the vanity and foolery 
which cleave thereunto. Gold is and r'^-mains gold as well 
when a strumpet carries it about her, as when 'tis with an 
honest, good, and godly wormian. The body of a strumpet is 
even as well God's creature, as the body of an honest matron 
In this manner ought we to part and separate vanity and 
folly from the thing and substance, or from the creature given 
and God who created it. 



OF JUSTIFICATION. 145 

COXCV. 

Upright and faithful Christians ever think they are not 
faithful, nor believe as they ought; and therefore they con- 
stantly strive, wrestle, and are diligent to lieep and to increase 
faith, as good workmen always see that something Is wanting 
in their workmanship, ^ut the botchers think that nothing 
is wanting in what they do, but that everything is well and 
complete. Like as the Jews conceive they have the ten com- 
mandments at their fingers' end, whereas, in truth, they neither 
learn nor regard them. 

CCXCVi. 

Truly it is held for presumption in a human creature that 
he dare boast of his own proper righteousness of faith; 'tis a 
hard matter for a man to say: I am the child of God, and am 
comforted and solaced through the immeasurable grace and 
mercy of my heavenly Father. To do this from the heart, 
is not in every man's power. Therefore no man is able to 
teach pure and aright touching faith, nor to reject the 
righteousness of works, without sound practice and experi- 
ence. St. Paul was well exercised in this art; he speaks 
more vilely of the law than any arch heretic can speak of the 
sacrament of the altar, of baptism, or than the Jews have 
spoken thereof; for he names the law, the ministration of 
death, the ministration of sin, and the ministration of con- 
demnation; yea, he holds all the works of the law, and what 
the law requires, without Christ, dangerous and hurtful, which 
Moses, if he had then lived, would doubtless have taken very 
ill at Paul's hands. It was, according to human reason, 
spoken too scornfully. 

CCXCVII. 

Faith and hope are variously distinguishable. And, first, 
in regard of the subject, wherein everything subsists: faith 
consists in a person's understanding, hope in the will ; 
these two cannot be separated; they are like the t\\ o cheru- 
bim over the mercy-seat. 

Secondly, in regard of the office : faith indites, dis- 
tinguishes, and teaches, and is the knowledge and acknow- 
ledgment; hope admonishes, awakens, hears, expects, and 
suffers. 

Thirdly, in regard to the object: faith looks to the word or 

L 



146 luther's table-talk. 

promise, which is truth; hut hope to that which the Word 
proniises, which is the good or benefit. 

Fourthly, in regard of order in degree: faith is first, and 
before all adversities and troubles, and is the beginning of 
life. Heb. xi. But hope follows after, and springs up in 
trouble. Rom. v. 

Fifthly, by reason of the contrariety: faith fights against 
errors and heresies; it proves and judges spirits and doctrines 
But hope strives against troubles and vexations, and among 
the evil it expects good. 

Faith, in divinity, is the wisdom and providence, and be- 
longs to the doctrine. But hope is the courage and joyful- 
ness in divinity, and pertains to admonition. Faith is the 
dialectica, for it is altogether prudence and wisdom; hope is 
the rheforica, an elevation of the heart and mind. As wisdom 
without courage is futile, even so faith without hope is no- 
thing w^orth; for hope endures and overcomes misfortune and 
evil. And as a joyous valour without understanding is but 
rashness, so hope without faith is spiritual presumptioa 
Faith is the key to the sacred Scriptures, the right Cabala 
or exposition, which one receives of tradition, as the prophets 
left this doctrine to their disciples. 'Tis said St. Peter wepl 
whenever he thought of the gentleness with which Jesus 
taught. Faith is given from one to another, and remains 
continually in one school. Faith is not a quality, as the 
schoolmen say, but a gift of God. 

ccxcvin. 
Everything that is done in the w^orld is done by hope. No 
husbandman would sow one grain of corn, if he hoped not it 
would grow up and become seed; no bachelor would marry 
a wife, if he hoped not to have children; no merchant or 
tradesman would set himself to work, if he did not hope to 
reap benefit thereby, &c. How much more, then, does hope 
urge us on to everlasting life and salvation? 

ccxcix. 
Faith's substance is our will; its manner is, that we take 
hold on Christ by divine instinct; its final cause and fruit, 
that it purifies the heart, makes us children of God, and 
brings ^vith it the remission of sins. 



OF JUSTIFICATION. 147 

CCC. 

Adam received the promise of the woman's seed ere he had 
done any work or sacrifice, to the end God's truth might stand 
fast — namely, that we are justified before God altogether 
without works, and obtain forgiveness of sins merely by 
grace. Whoso is able to believe this well and steadfastly, is 
a doctor above all the doctors in the world. 

ccci. 
Faith is not only necessary, that thereby the ungodly may 
become justified and saved before God, and their hearts be 
settled in peace, but it is necessary in every other respect. 
St. Paul says: "Now that we are justified by faith, we have 
peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ." 

CCCII. 

Joseph of Arimathea had a faith in Christ, like as the 
apostles had; he thought Christ would have been a worldly 
and temporal potentate; therefore he took care of him as of 
a good friend, and buried him honourably. He believed not 
that Christ should rise again from death, and become a spi- 
ritual and everlasting king. 

CCCIII. 

When Abraham shall rise again at the last day, then he 
will chide us for our unbelief, and will say: I had not the 
hundredth part of the promises which ye have, and yet I be- 
lieved. That example of Abraham exceeds all human na- 
tural reason, who, overcoming the paternal love he bore 
towards his only son Isaac, was all obedient to God, and, 
against the law of nature, would have sacrificed that son. 
What, for the space of three days, he felt in his breast, how 
his heart yearned and panted, what hesitations and trials he 
had, cannot be expressed. 

ccciv. 
All heretics have continually failed in this one point, that 
they do not rightly understand or know the article of justifi- 
cation. If we had not this article certain and clear, it were 
impossible we could criticise the pope's false doctrine of in- 
dulgences and other abominable errors, much less be able to 
overcome greater spiritual errors and vexations. If we 

l2 



148 LUTHER S TABLE-TALK. 

only permit Christ to be our Saviour, then we have won, for 
he is the only girdle which clasps the whole body together, as 
St. Paul excellently teaches. 

If we look to the spiritual birth and substance of a true 
Christian, we shall soon extinguish all deserts of good works; 
for they serve us to no use, neither to purchase sanctification, 
nor to deliver us from sin, death, devil, or hell. 

Little children are saved only by faith without any good 
works; therefore faith alone justifies. If God's power be able 
to effect that in one, then he is also able to accomplish it in 
all; for the power of the child effects it not, but the power of 
faith; neither is it done through the child's weakness or dis- 
ability; for then that weakness would be merit of itself, or 
equivalent to merit. It is a mischievous thing that we 
miserable, sinful wretches will upbraid God, and hit him in 
the teeth with our works, and think thereby to be justified 
before him; but God will not allow it. 

cccv. 

This article, how we are saved, is the chief of the whole 
Christian doctrine, to which all divine disputations must be 
directed. All the prophets were chiefly engaged upon it, 
and sometimes much perplexed about it. For when this 
article is kept fast and sure by a constant faith, then all other 
articles draw on softly after, as that of the Holy Trinity, &c. 
God has declared no article so plainly and openly as this, that 
we are saved only by Christ; though he speaks much of the 
Holy Trinity, yet he dwells continually upon this article of 
the salvation of our souls; other articles are of great weight, 
but this surpasses all. 

cccvi. 

A capuchin says: wear a grey coat and a hood, a rope 
round thy body, and sandals on thy feet. A cordelier says: 
put on a black hood; an ordinary papist says: do this or that 
work, hear mass, pray, fast, give alms, &c. But a true 
Christian says: I am justified and saved only by faith in 
Christ, without any works or merits of my own; compare 
these together, and judge which is the true righteousness. 



OF JUSTIFICATION. 149 

CCCVII. 

Christ says: " The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak:" 
St. Paul also says: the spirit willingly would give itself 
wholly unto God, would trust in him, and be obedient; but 
natural reason and understanding, flesh and blood, resist and 
will not go forward. Therefore our Lord God must needs 
liave patience and bear with us. God will not put out the 
glimmering flax; the faithful have as yet but only the first 
fruits of the spirit; they have not the fulfilling, but the tenth. 

CCCVIII. 

I well understand that St. Paul was also weak in faith, 
whence he boasted, and said: " I am a servant of God, and 
an apostle of Jesus Christ." An angel stood by him at sea, 
and comforted him, and when he came to Rome, he was com- 
forted as he saw the brethren come out to meet him. Hereby 
we see what the communion and company does of such as fear 
God. The Lord commanded the disciples to remain together 
in one place, before they received the Holy Ghost, and to 
comfort one another; for Christ well knew that adversaries 
would assault them. 

cccix. 

A Christian must be well armed, grounded, and furnished 
with sentences out of God's word, that so he may stand and 
defend religion and himself against the devil, in case he should 
be asked to embrace another doctrine. 

cccx. 

When at the last day we shall live again, we shall blush for 
shame, and say to ourselves: "fie on thee, in that thou hast 
not been more courageous, bold, and strong to believe in 
Christ, and to endure aU manner of adversities, crosses, and 
persecutions, seeing his glory is so great. If I were now in 
the world, I would not stick to suffer ten thousand times 
more." 

cccxi. 

Although a man knew, and could do as much as the angels 
in heaven, yet all this w^ould not make him a Christian, un- 
less he knew Christ and believed in him. God says: " Let 
not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man 



150 Luther's table-talk. 

glory in his might; let not the rich man glory in his riches: 
but let him that glorieth, glory in this, that he understandeth 
and knoweth me, that I am the Lord, which doth exercise 
loving-kindness, judgment, and righteousness," &c. 

CCCXII. 

The article of our justification before God is as with a son 
who is born heir to all his father's goods, and comes not there- 
unto by deserts, but naturally, of ordinary course. But yet, 
meantime, his father admonishes him to do such and such 
things, and promises him gifts to make him the more willing. 
As when he says to him: if thou wilt be good, be obedient, 
study diligently, then I will buy thee a fine coat; or, come 
hither to me, and I will give thee an apple. In such sort 
does he teach his son industry; though the whole inheritance 
belongs unto him of course, yet will he make him, by promises, 
pliable and willing to do what he would have done. 

Even so God deals with us; he is loving unto us with 
friendly and sweet words, promises us spiritual and temporal 
blessings, though everlasting life is presented unto those who 
believe in Christ, by mere grace and mercy, gratis, withou"^ 
any merits, works, or worthinesses. 

And this ought we to teach in the church and in the 
assembly of God, that God will have upright and good works, 
which he has commanded, not such as we ourselves take in 
hand, of our own choice and devotion, or well meaning, as the 
friars and priests teach in Popedom, for such works are not 
pleasing to God, as Christ says: " In vain do they worship 
me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men," &c. 
We must teach of good works, yet always so that the article 
of justification remain pure and unfalsified. For Christ 
neither can nor will endure any beside himself; he will have 
the bride alone; he is full of jealousy. 

Should we teach: if thou believest, thou shalt be saved, 
whatsoever thou doest; that were stark naught; for faith is 
either false and feigned, or, though it be upright, yet is 
eclipsed, when people wittingly and wilfully sin against God's 
command. And the Holy Spirit, which is given to the faith- 
ful, departs by reason of evil works done against the con- 
science, as the example of David sufficiently testifies. 



OF JUSTIFICATION. 151 

CCCXIII. 

As to ceremonies and ordinances, the kingdom of love 
must have precedence and government, and not tyranny. It 
must be a willing, not a halter love; it must altogether be 
directed and construed for the good and profit of the neigh- 
bour; and the greater he that governs, the more he ought to 
serve according to love. 

cccxiv. 

The love towards our neighbour must be like the pure 
and chaste love between bride and bridegroom, where all 
faults are connived at and borne with, and only the virtues 
regarded. 

cccxv. 

Believest thou? then thou wilt speak boldly. Speakest 
thou boldly? then thou must suffer. vSufferest thou? then 
thou shalt be comforted. For faith, the confession thereof, 
and the cross, follow one upon another. 

cccxvi. 

Give and it shall be given unto you: this is a fine maxim, 
and makes people poor and rich; it is that which maintains 
my house. I would not boast, but I well know what I give 
aNs^ay in the year. If my gracious lord and master, the 
prince elector, should give a gentleman two thousand florins, 
this should hardly answer to the cost of my housekeeping for 
one year; and yet I have but three hundred florins a year, 
but God blesses these, and makes them suffice. 

There is in Austria a monastery, which, in former times, 
was very rich, and remained rich so long as it was charitable 
to the poor; but when it ceased to give, then it became 
indigent, and is so to this day. Not long since, a poor man 
went there and solicited alms, which was denied him; he 
demanded the cause why they refused to give for God's sake? 
The porter of the monastery answered: We are become 
poor; whereupon the mendicant said: The cause of your 
poverty is this: ye had formerly in this monastery two 
brethren, the one named Date (give), and the other Dabitur 
(it shall be given you). The former ye thrust out; the other 
went away of himself. 

We are bound to help one's neighbour three manner of 



152 luther's table-talk. 

ways — with giving, lending, and selling. But no man gives; 
every one scrapes and claws all to himself; each would 
willingly steal, but give nothing, and lend but upon usury. 
No man sells unless he can over-reach his neighbour; there- 
fore is Dabitur gone, and our Lord God will bless us no 
more so richly. Beloved, he that desires to have anything, 
must also s^ive: a liberal hand was never in want, or empty. 

CCCXVIT. 

Desert is a work nowhere to be found, for Christ gives 
a reward by reason of the promise. If the prince elector 
should say to me: Come to the court, and I will give thee 
one hundred florins, I perform a work in going to the court, 
yet I receive not the gift by reason of my work in going 
thither, but by reason of the promise the prince made me. 

CCCXVIII. 

I marvel at the madness and bitterness of Wetzell, in 
undertaking to write so much against the Protestants, 
assailing us without rhyme or reason, and, as we say, getting a 
case out of a hedge; as where he rages against this principle 
of ours, that the works and acts of a farmer, husbandman, or 
any other good and godly Christian, if done in faith, are far 
more precious in the sight of Cod, than all the works of 
monks, friars, nuns, &c. This poor, ignorant fellow gets 
very angry against us, regarding not the works which God 
has commanded and imposed upon each man in his vocation, 
state, and calling. He heeds only superstitious practices, 
devised for show and effect, which God neither commands 
nor approves of. 

St. Paul, in his epistles, wrote of good works and virtues 
more energetically and truthfully than all the philosophers; 
for he extols highly the works of godly Christians, in their 
respective vocations and callings. Let Wetzell know that 
David's wars and battles were more pleasing to God than the 
fastings and prayings even of the holiest of the old monks, 
setting aside altogether the works of the monks of our time, 
which are simply ridiculous. 

cccxix. 
I never work better than when I am inspired by anger; 
when I am angry, I can write, pray, and preach well, for 



OF JUSTIFICATION. 153 

then my whole temperament is quickened, my understanding 
sharpened, and all mundane vexations and temptations depart. 

cccxx. 

Dr. Justus Jonas asked me if the thoughts and words ot 
the prophet Jeremiah were Christianlike, when he cursed 
the day of his birth. I said: We must now and then wake 
up our Lord God with such words. Jeremiah had cause to 
murmur in this way. Did not our Saviour Christ say: " O 
faithless and perverse generation! How long shall I be with 
you, and suffer you?" Moses also took God in hand, where 
he said: " Wlierefore hast thou afflicted thy servant? Have I 
conceived all this people? Have I begotten them?" 

cccxxi. 

A man must needs be plunged in bitter affliction when in 
his heart he means good, and yet is not regarded. I can 
never get rid of these cogitations, wishing I had never begun 
this business with the pope. So, too, I desire myself rather 
dead than to hear or see God's Word and his servants con- 
temned; but 'tis the frailty of our nature to be thus dis- 
couraged. 

They who condemn the movement of anger against anta- 
gonists, are theologians who deal in mere speculations; they 
play with words, and occupy themselves with subtleties, but 
when they are aroused, and take a real interest in the 
matter, they are touched sensibly. 

cccxxii. 

" In quietness and in confidence shall be your strength." 
This sentence I expounded thus: If thou intendest to vanquish 
the greatest, the most abominable and wickedest enemy, who 
is able to do thee mischief both in body and soul, and against 
whom thou preparest all sorts of weapons, but canst not 
overcome; then know that there is a sweet and loving physi- 
cal herb to serve thee, named Patientia. 

Thou wilt say: How may I attain this physic? Take 
unto thee faith, which says: no creature can do me mischief 
without the will of God. In case thou receivest hurt and 
mischief by thine enemy, this is done by the sweet and 
gracious will of God, in such sort that the enemy hurts him- 



154 Luther's table-talk. 

self a thousand times more than he does thee. Hence flows 
unto me, a Christian, the love which says: I will, iustead\of 
the evil which mine enemy does unto me, do him all the 
good I can; I will heap coals of fire upon his head. This is 
the Christian armour and weapon, wherewith to beat and 
overcome those enemies that seem to be like huge mountains 
In a word, love teaches to suffer and endure all things. 

CCCXXIII. 

A certain honest and God-forbearing man at Wittenberg, 
told me, that though he lived peaceably with every one, hurt 
no man, was ever quiet, yet many people were enemies unto 
him. I comforted him in this manner: Arm thyself with 
patience, and be not angry though they hate thee; what 
offence, I pray, do we give the devil? "What ails him to be so 
great an enemy unto us? only because he has not that which 
God has; I know no other cause of his vehement hatred 
towards us. If God give thee to eat, eat; if he cause thee 
to fast, be resigned thereto ; gives he thee honours? take 
them; hurt or shame? endure it; casts he thee into prison? 
murmur not; will he make thee a king? obey him; casts he 
thee down again? heed it not. 

CCCXXIV. 

Patience is the most excellent of the virtues, and, in Sacred 
Writ, highly praised and recommended by the Holy Ghost. 
The learned heathen philosophers applaud it, but they do 
not know its genuine basis, being without the assistance of 
God. Epictetus, the wise and judicious Greek, said very 
well: " Suffer and abstain." 

cccxxv. 
It was the custom of old, in burying the dead, to lay their 
heads towards the sun-rising, by reason of a spiritual mystery 
and signification therein manifested; but this was not an 
enforced law. So all laws and ceremonies should be free in the 
church, and not be done on compulsion, being things which 
neither justify nor condemn in the sight of God, but are 
observed merely for the sake of orderly discipline. 

cccxxvi. 
The righteousness of works and hypocrisy, are the most 
mischievous diseases born in us, and not easily expelled, 



OF PRAYER 1.55 

especially when they are confirmed and settled upon us by 
use and practice; for all mankind will have dealings with 
Almighty God, and dispute with him, according to their 
human natural understanding, and will make satisfaction to 
God for their sins, with their own strength and self-chosen 
works. For my part, I have so often deceived our Lord 
God by promising to be upright and good, that I will promise 
no more, but will only pray for a happy hour, when it shall 
please God to make me good. 

CCCXXVII. 

A popish priest once argued with me in this manner: Evil 
works are damned, therefore good works justify. I answered: 
This your argument is nothing worth; it concludes not 
ratione contrarioriun ; the things are not in connexion; evil 
works are evil in complete measure, because they proceed 
from a heart that is altogether spoiled and evil; but good 
works, yea, even in an upright Christian, are incompletely 
good; for they proceed out of a weak obedience but little 
recovered and restored. Whoso can say from his heart : 
I am a sinner, but God is righteous; and who, at the point 
of death, from his heart can say; Lord Jesus Christ, I com- 
mit my spirit into thy hands, may assure himself of true 
righteousness, and that he is not of the number of those that 
blaspheme God, in relying upon their own works and 
righteousness. 



OF PRAYER 



CCCXXVIII. 



None can believe how powerful prayer is, and what it ii 
able to effect, but those who nave learned it by experience. 

It is a great matter when in extreme need, to take hold on 
prayer. I know, whenever I have earnestly prayed, I have 
been amply heard, and have obtained more than I prayed for; 
God, indeed, sometimes delayed, but at last he came. 

Ecclesiasticus says: " The prayer of a good and godly 



156 Luther's table-talk. 

Christian availeth more to health, than the physician's 
phvsic." 

O how great a thing, how marvellous, a godly Christian's 
prayer is! how powerful with God; that a poor human creature 
should speak with God's high Majesty in heaven, and not be 
affrighted, but, on the contrary, know that God smiles upon 
him for Christ's sake, his dearly beloved Son. The heart 
and conscience, in this act of praying, must not fly and recoil 
backwards by reason of our sins and unworthiness, or stand 
in doubt, or be scared away. We must not do as the Ba- 
varian did, who, with great devotion, called upon St. Leonard, 
an idol set up in a church in Bavaria, behind which idol 
stood one who answered the Bavarian, and said: Fie on thee, 
Bavarian; and in that sort often repulsed and would not hear 
him, till at last, the Bavarian went away, and said : Fie on 
thee, Leonard. 

When we pray, w^e must not let it come to: Fie upon thee; 
but certainly hold and believe, that we are already heard in 
that for which we pray, with faith in Christ. Therefore the 
ancients ably defined prayer an Ascensus mentis ad Deum, 
a climbing up of the heart unto God. 

cccxxix. 

Our Saviour Christ as excellently as briefly comprehends in 
the Lord's prayer all things needful and necessary. Except 
under troubles, trials, and vexations, prayer cannot rightly be 
made. God says: " Call on me in the time of trouble;" with- 
out trouble it is only a bald prattling, and not from the heart; 
'tis a common saying: " Need teaches to pray." And though 
the papiats say that God well understands all the" words of 
those that pray, yet St. Bernard is far of another opinion, 
who says: God hears not the words of one that prays, unless 
he that prays first hears them himself. The pope is a mere 
tormentor of the conscience. The assemblies of his greased 
crew, in prayer, were altogether like the croaking of frogs, 
which edified nothing at all; mere sophistry and deceit, fruit- 
less and unprofitable. Prayer is a strong wall and fortress 
of the church; it is a godly Christian's weapon, which no 
man knows or finds, but only he who has the spirit of grace 
and of prayer. 

The three first petitions in our Lord's prayer comprehend 
such great and celestial things, that no heart is able to search 



OF PRAYER. 157 

them out. The fourth contains the whole policy and economy 
of temporal and house government, and all things necessary 
for this life. The fifth fights against our own evil consciences, 
and against original and actual sins, which trouble them. 
Truly that prayer was penned by wisdom itself; none but 
God could have done it. 

cccxxx. 

Prayer in Popedom is mere tongue-threshing; not prayer, 
but a work of obedience. Thence a confused sea of Horce 
CanoniccBj the howling and babbling in cells and monasteries, 
where they read and sing the psalms and collects, without 
any spiritual devotion, understanding neither the words, 
sentences, nor meaning. 

How I tormented myself with those Horce CanoniccE be- 
fore the gospel came, which by reason of much business I 
often intermitted, I cannot express. On the Saturdays, I 
used to lock myself up in my cell, and accomplish what the 
whole week I had neglected. But at last X was troubled with 
so many affairs, that I was fain often to omit also my Satur- 
day's devotions. At length, when I saw that Arasdorf and 
others derided such devotion, then I quite left it off. 

From this great torment we are now delivered by the gos- 
pel. Though I had done no more but only freed people from 
that torment, they might well give me thanks for it. 

cccxxxi. 

We cannot pray without faith in Christ the Mediator. Turks, 
Jews, and papists may repeat the words of prayer, but they 
cannot pray. And although the Apostles were taught this 
Lord's prayer by Christ, and prayed often, yet they prayed 
not as they should have prayed; for Christ says: "Hitherto 
ye have not prayed in my name;" whereas, doubtless, they 
had prayed much, speaking the words. But when the Holy 
Ghost came, then they prayed aright in the name of Christ. 
If praying and reading of prayer be but only a bare work, as 
the papists hold, then the righteousness of the law is nothing 
worth. The upright prayer of a godly Christian is a strong 
hedge, as God himself says: " And I sought for a man among 
them that should make up the hedge, and stand in the gap 
before me for the land, that I should not destroy it, but I 
found none." 



158 Luther's table-talk. 



CCCXXXII. 



When Moses, with the children of Israel, came to the Red 
Sea, then he cried with trembling and quaking; yet he opened 
not his mouth, neither was his voice heard on earth by the 
people; doubtless, he cried and sighed in his heart, and said: 
Ah, Lord God! what course shall I now take? Which way 
shall I now turn myself? How am I come to this strait? 
No help or counsel can save us; before us is the sea; behind 
us are our enemies the Egyptians; on both sides high and 
huge mountains; I am the cause that all this people shall now 
be destroyed. Then answered God, and said: " Wherefore 
criest thou unto me?" as if God should say: What an alarum 
dost thou make, that the whole heavens ring! Human rea- 
son is not able to search this passage out. The way through 
the Red Sea is full as broad and wide, if not wider, than 
Wittenberg lies from Coburg, that so, doubtless, the people 
were constrained in the night season to rest and to eat therein; 
for six hundred thousand men, besides women and children, 
would require a good time to pass through, though they went 
one hundred and fifty abreast. 

CCCXXXIII. 

It is impossible that God should not hear the prayers which 
with faith are made in Christ, though he give not according 
to the measure, manner, and time we dictate, for he will not 
be tied. In such sort dealt God with the mother of St. Au- 
gustin; she prayed to God that her son might be converted, 
but as yet it would not be; then she ran to the learned, in- 
treating them to persuade and advise him thereunto. She 
propounded unto him a marriage with a Christian virgin, 
that thereby he might be drawn and brought to the Chris- 
tian faith, but all would not do as yet. But when our 
Lord God came thereto, he came to purpose, and made of 
him such an Augustin, that he became a great light to the 
church. St. James says: "Pray one for another, for the 
prayer of the righteous availeth much." Prayer is a powerful 
thing; for God has bound and tied himself thereunto, 
cccxxxiv. 

Christ gave the Lord's prayer, according to the ideas of 
the Jews — that is, he directed it only to the Father, whereas 
they that pray, should pray as though they were to be heard 



OF PRAYER. 159 

for the Son's sake. This was because Christ would not be 
praised before his death. 

cccxxxv. 

Justus Jonas asked Luther if these sentences in Scripture 
did not contradict each other; where God says to Abraham; 
" If I find ten in Sodom, I "vvdll not destroy it;" and where 
Ezekiel says: "Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and 
Job, were in it, yet would I not hear," &c. ; and where Jere- 
miah says: " Therefore pray not thou for this people.'' Luther 
answered: No, they are not against one another; for in Eze- 
kiel it was forbidden them to pray, but it was not so with 
Abraham. Therefore we must have regard to the word; 
when God says: thou shalt not pray, then we may well 
cease. 

cccxxxvi. 

When governors and rulers are enemies to God's Word, 
then our duty is to depart, to sell and forsake all we have, to 
fly from one place to another, as Christ commands. We must 
make for ourselves no tumults, by reason of the gospel, but 
suffer all things. 

CCCXXXVII. 

Upright Christians pray without ceasing; though they pray 
not always with their mouths, yet their hearts pray conti- 
nually, sleeping and waking; for the sigh of a true Christian 
is a prayer. As the Psalm saith: " Because of the deep sigh- 
ing of the poor, I will up, saith the Lord," &c. In like man- 
ner a true Christian always carries the cross, though he feel 
it not always. 

cccxxxvm. 

The Lord's prayer binds the people together, and knits 
them one to another, so that one prays for another, and toge- 
ther one with another; and it is so strong and powerful that 
it even drives away the fear of death. 

cccxxxix. 

Prayer preserves the church, and hitherto has done the 
best for the church; therefore we must continually pray. 
Hence Christ says : "Ask, and ye shall have; seek, and ye 
shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you." 

First, when we are in trouble, he wdll have us to pray; for 
God often, as it were, hides himself, and will not hear; yea, 
will not suffer himself to be found. Then we must seek him; 



160 LUTHER S TABLE-TALK. 

that is, we must continue in prayer. When we seek him, he 
often locks himself up, as it were, in a private chamber; if 
we intend to come in unto him, then we must knock, and 
when we have knocked once or twice, then he begins a little 
to hear. At last, when we make much knocking, then he 
opens, and says: What will ye have? Lord, say we, we would 
have this or that; then, says he, Take it unto you. In such 
sort must we persist in praying, and waken God up. 



OF BAPTISM. 

CCCXL. 

The ancient teachers ordained three sorts of baptizing ; 
of water, of the Spirit, and of blood ; these were ob- 
served in the church. The catechumens were baptized in 
water ; others, that could not get such water-bathing, and 
nevertheless believed, were saved in and through the Holy 
Spirit, as Cornelius was saved, before he was baptized. The 
third sort were baptized in blood, that is, in martyrdom. 

CCCXLI. 

Heaven is given unto me freely, for nothing . I have assu- 
rance hereof confirmed unto me by sealed covenants, that is, 
I am baptized, and frequent the sacrament of the Lord's 
Supper. Therefore I keep the bond safe and sure, lest the 
devil tear it in pieces ; that is, I live and remain in God's 
fear, and pray daily unto him. God could not have given 
me better security of my salvation, and of the gospel, than by 
the death and passion of his only Son : when I believe that 
he overcame death, and died for me, and therewith behold 
the promise of the Father, then I have the bond complete. 
And when I have the seal of baptism and the Lord's Supper 
prefixed thereto, then I am well provided for. 

CCCXLII. 

I was asked : when there is uncertainty, whether a person 
has been baptized or not, may he be baptized under a con» 
dition, as thus : If thou be not baptized, then I baptize thee ? 
I answered: The church must exclude such baptizing, au«i 



OF BAPTISM. 3C'I 

not endure it, though there be a doubt of the previous bap- 
tizing of any person, yet he shall receive baptism, pure ami 
simple, without any condition. 

CCCXLIII. 

The papists, in private confession, only regard the work. 
There was such a running to confession, they were never 
satisfied ; if one had forgotten to confess anything, however 
trivial, which afterwards came to his remembrance, oiF he 
must be back to his confessor, and confess again. I knew 
a doctor in law who was so bent upon confessing, that, 
before he could receive the sacrament, he went three times to 
his confessor. In my time, while in Popedom, v/e made 
our confessors weary, and they again perplexed us with their 
conditional absolutions ; for they absolved in this manner: 
" I absolve and loosen thee, by reason of the merits of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, of the sorrow of thy heart, of thy 
mouth's confession, and of the satisfaction of thy works," &c. 
These conditions, and Avhat pertained thereunto, were the 
cause of great mischief. All this we did out of fear, that 
thereby we might be justified and saved before God; we 
were so troubled and overburdened with traditions of men, 
that Gerson was constrained to slacken the bridle of the con- 
science and ease it; he was the first who began to break out 
of this prison, for he wrote, that it was no mortal sin to 
neglect the ordinances and commandments of tlie church, or 
to act contrary to them, unless it were done out of contempt, 
wilfully, or from a stubborn mind. These words, although 
they were but weak and few, yet they raised up and comforted 
many consciences. 

Against such bondage and slavery I wrote a book on 
Christian liberty, showing that such strict laws and ordi- 
nances of human inventions ought not to be observed. There 
are now, however, certain gross, ignorant, and inexperienced 
fellows, who never felt such captivity, that presumptuously 
undertake utterly to contemn and reject all laws and ordi- 
nances. 

CCCXLIV. 

If a woman that had murdered her child Avere absolved by 
me, and the crime were afterwards discovered publicly, and 
I were examined before the judge, I might not give witness 

M 



162 Luther's table-talk. 

in the matter — we must make a difference between the church 
and temporal government. She confessed not to me as to a man, 
but to Christ, and if Christ keep silence thereupon, it is mj 
duty to keep silence also, and to say: I know nothing of the 
matter thereof; if Christ heard it, then may he speak of it; 
though, meantime, I would privately say to the woman: 
Thou wretch, do so no more. For, while I am not the man 
to speak before the seat of justice, in temporal causes, in 
matters touching the conscience, I ought to affright sinners 
with God's wrath against sin, through the law. Such as 
acknowledge and confess their sins, I must lift up and com- 
fort again, by the preaching of the gospel. We will not be 
drawn to their seats of justice, and markets of hatred and dis- 
sension. We have hitherto protected and maintained the 
jurisdiction and rights of the church, and still will do so, 
yielding not in the least to the terhporal jurisdiction in causes 
belonging to doctrine and consciences. Let them mind their 
charge, wherewith they will find enough to do, and leave ours 
to us, as Christ has commanded. 

CCCXLV. 

Auricular confession was instituted only that people 
might give an account of their faith, and from their hearts 
confess an earnest desire to receive the holy sacrament. We 
force no man thereunto. 

CCCXLVI. 

Christ gave the keys to the church for her comfort, and 
commanded her servants to deal therewith according to his 
direction, to bind the impenitent, and to absolve them that, 
repenting, acknowledge and confess their sins, are heartily 
sorry for them, and believe that God forgives them for Christ's 
sake. 

CCCXLVII. 

It was asked, did the Hussites well in administering the 
sacrament to young children, on the allegation that the graces 
of God apply equally to all human creatures. Dr. Luther re- 
plied: they were undoubtedly wrong, since young children 
need not the communion for their salvation; but still the 
innovation could not be regarded as a sin of the Hussites, 
since St. Cyprian, long ago, set them the example. 



OF BAPTISM. 163 

CCCXLVIII. 

Does he to whom the sacrament is administered by a 
heretic, really receive the sacrament? Yes, replied Dr. 
Luther: if he be ignorant that the person administering is 
a heretic. The sacramentarians reject the body of Christ; 
the anabaptists baptism, and therefore they cannot efficiently 
baptize; yet if a person apply to a sacramentarian, not know- 
ing him as such, and receive from him the sacrament, himself 
believing it to be the veritable body of Christ, it is the 
veritable body of Christ that he actually receives. 

CCCXLIX. 

The anabaptists cavil as to how the salvation of man is to 
be effected by water. The simple answer is, that all things 
are possible to him who believes in God Almighty. If, 
indeed, a baker w^ere to say to me: " This bread is a body, and 
this wine is blood," I should laugh at him incredulously. 
But when Jesus Christ, the Almighty God, taking in his 
hand bread and wine, tells me: "This is my body and my 
blood,** then we must believe, for it is God who speaks — God 
who with a word created all things. 

CCCL. 

It was asked whether, in a case of necessity, the father of 
a family might administer the Lord's supper to his children 
or servants. Dr. Luther replied: " By no means, for he is 
not called thereto, and they who are not called, may not 
preach, much less administer the sacrament. 'Twould lead 
to infinite disorder, for many people would then wholly dis- 
pense with the ministers of the church." 

CCCLI. 

When Jesus Christ directed his apostles to go and instruct 
and baptize all nations, he meant not that children should be 
excluded; the apostles were to baptize all the Gentiles, young 
or old, great or small. The baptism of children is distinctly 
enjoined in Mark x. 14: "The kingdom of God is of little 
children." We must not look at this text with the eyes of a 
calf, or of a cow vaguely gaping at a new gate, but do with 
it as at court we do with the prince's letters, read it and weigh 
it, and read it and weigh it again and again, with our most 
earnest attention. 

m2 



164 Luther's table-talk. 



CCCLII. 



The papists say that 'twas Pope Melchiades baptized ttie 
emperor Constantine, but this is a fiction. The emperor 
Constantine was baptized at Nicomedia by Eusebius, bishop 
of that town, in the sixty-fifth year of his life, and the thirty- 
third of his reign. 

cccLin. 

The anabaptists pretend that children, not as yet having 
reason, ought not to receive baptism. I answer: That reason 
in no way contributes to faith. Nay, in that children are 
destitute of reason, they are all the more fit and proper re- 
cipients of baptism. For reason is the greatest enemy that 
faith has: it never comes to the aid of spiritual things, but — 
more frequently than not — struggles against the Divine Word, 
treating with contempt all that emanates from God. If God 
can communicate the Holy Ghost to grown persons, he can, a 
^ortioriy communicate it to young children. Faith comes of 
the Word of God, when this is heard; little children hear 
that Word when they receive baptism, and therewith they 
receive also faith. 

CCCLIV. 

When, in a difficult labour, the arm or leg of the child 
alone presents itself, we must not baptize that limb, under 
the idea that thereby the infant can receive baptism. Still 
less can it be pretended that you baptize a child not yet come 
into the world, by pouring water on the mother. The text 
of St. John manifestly shows that such practices are prohibited 
by Scripture: " Except a man be born again, he cannot see 
the kingdom of God." We must not, therefore, baptize a 
child until it has actually come into the world, whole and 
entire. When any difficulty occurs, those present must kneel 
and pray unto Christ, that he will deign to deliver the poor 
child and its mother from their sufferings, and they must do 
this in full confidence that the Lord will thereupon listen to the 
dictates of his merciful nature and wisdom. This prayer, 
offered up in faith, introduces the child to the Almighty, who 
himself has said: " Suffer little children to come unto me, for 
of such is the kingdom of God." We may rest assured that, 
under such circumstances, the child is not excluded from 
salvation, even though it die without having been regularly 



OF BAPTISM. 165 

baptized. Should an infant, on coming into the world, be so 
extremely weak and feeble that there is manifest danger of its 
dying ere it can be carried to the church, then the women pre- 
sent should baptize it themselves, in the usual form. For this 
purpose, it is always desirable that the mother should have 
about her at least two or three persons, to attest that baptism 
lias in this way been administered to the child, ex necessitate. 

CCCLV. 

Some one sent to know whether it was permissible to 
use warm water in baptism? The Doctor replied: " Tell the 
blockhead that water, warm or cold, is water." 

CCCLVI. 

In 1541, Doctor Menius asked Doctor Luther, in what 
manner a f^Qvi should be baptized? The Doctor replied : 
You must fill a large tub with water, and, having divested 
the Jew of his clothes, cover him with a white garment. He 
must then sit down in the tub, and you must baptize him 
quite under the water. The ancients, when they were bap- 
tized, were attired in white, whence the first Sunday after 
Easter, which was peculiarly consecrated to this ceremony, 
was called domijiica in albis. This garb was rendered the 
more suitable, from the circumstance that it was, as now, the 
custom to bury people in a white shroud; and baptism, you 
know, is an emblem of our death. I have no doubt that 
when Jesus was baptized in the river Jordan, he was attired 
in a white robe. If a Jew, not converted at heart, were to 
ask baptism at my hands, I would take him on to the bridge, 
tie a stone round his neck, and hurl him into the river ; for 
these wretches are wont to make a jest of our religion. Yet, 
after all, water and the Divine Word being the essence of 
baptism, a Jew, or any other, would be none the less validly 
baptized, that his own feelings and intentions were not the 
result of faith. 



166 Luther's table-talk. 



OF THE SACRAMENT OF THE 
LORD'S SUPPER. 

CCCLVII. 

The blindness of the papists is great and mischievous; for 
they will neither believe the gospel nor yield thereunto, but 
boast of the church, and say: She has power to alter, and to 
do what she pleases; for, say they, Christ gave his body to 
his disciples in the evening after supper; but we receive it 
fasting, therefore we may, according to the church's ordinance, 
detain the cup from the laity. The ignorant wretches are 
not able to distinguish between the cup, which pertains to the 
substance of the sacrament, and fasting, which is an acci- 
dental, carnal thing, of no weight at all. The one has God's 
express word and command, the other consists in our will and 
choice. We urge the one, because God has commanded it; 
the other we leave to the election of the will, though we better 
like it to be received fasting, out of honour and reverence. 

CCCLVIII. 

It is a wonder how Satan brought into the church, and 
ordained, but one kind of the sacrament to be received. I 
cannot call to mind that ever I read how, whence, or for 
what cause it was so altered. It was first so ordained in the 
council of Constance, where nothing, however, is pleaded but 
only the custom. 

CCCLIX. 

The papists highly boast of their power and authority, 
which they would willingly confirm with this argument: the 
apostles altered baptism; therefore, say they, the bishops 
have power to alter the sacrament of the Lord's supper. I 
answer: admit that the apostles altered something; yet there 
is a great difference between an apostle and a bishop; an 
apostle was called immediately by God with gifts of the Holy 
Ghost; but a bishop is a person selected by man, to preach 
God's word, and ordain servants of the church in certain 
places. So, though the apostles had this power and autho- 
rity, yet the bishops have not. Although Elijah slew Baal's 
priests and the false prophets, it is not permitted that every 



OF THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORD's SUPPER. 167 

priest shall do the like. Hence St. Paul makes this difTcrence: 
" Some hath he given to be apostles, some teachers, some to 
be pastors and ministers," &c. Among the apostles was no 
supremacy or ruling; none was greater or higher in office 
than another; they were all equal, the one with the other. The 
definition as to the supremacy and rule of St. Peter above 
other bishops is false; it reaches further than they define it; 
they conclude thus : the pope's power and authority is the 
highest; he may ordain servants, alter kingdoms and govern- 
ments, depose some emperors and kings, and enthrone others. 
But we are in nowise to allow of such definitions; for every 
definition must be direct and proper, set down plain and 
clear; so that neither more nor less may in the definition be 
contained, than that which is described and defined. 

CCCLX. 

They that as yet are not well informed, but stand in doubt, 
touching the institution of the sacrament, may receive it 
under one kind; but those that are certain thereof, and yet 
receive it under one kind, act wrongfully and against their 
consciences. 

CCCLXI. 

"What signifies it to dispute and wrangle about the abomi- 
nable idolatry of elevating the sacrament on high to show it to 
the people, which has no approbation of the Fathers, and was 
introduced only to confirm the errors touching the worship 
thereof, as though bread and wine lost their substance, and 
retained only the form, smell, taste. This the papists call 
transubstantiation, and darken the right use of the sacra- 
ment; whereas, even in Popedom, at Milan, from Ambrose's 
time to the present day, they never held or observed in the 
mass either canon or elevation, or the Dominus vobiscian. 

CCCLXII. 

The elevation of the sacrament was taken out of the Old 
Testament; the Jews observed two forms, the one called 
Thruma, the other Trumpha ; Thruma was when they took 
an offering out of a basket, and lifted it up above them (like 
as they now lift up the oblate), and showed the same to our 
Lord God, after which they either burned or ate it: Trumpha, 
was an offering which they lifted not up above them, but 
showed it towards the four corners of the world, as the papists, 



168 Luther's table-talk. 

in the mass, make crosses, and other apish toys, towards the 
four corners of the world. 

When I first began to celebrate mass in Popedom, and to 
make such crossings with marvellous twistings of the fingers, 
and could not rightly hit the way, I said: " Mary, God's 
mother, how am I plagued with the mass, and especially with 
the crossings." Ah, Lord God! we were in those times poor 
plagued people, and yet it was nothing but mere idolatry. 
They terrified some in such sort with the words of consecra- 
tion, especially good and godly men who meant seriously, that 
they trembled and quaked at the pronouncing of these words: 
Hoc est corpus meum, ibr they were to pronounce them, sinr 
idla hesitatione ; he that stammered, or left out but one word, 
committed a great sin. Moreover, the words were to be 
spoken, without any abstraction of thought, in such a way, 
that only he must hear them that spake them, and none of the 
people standing by. Such an honest friar was I fifteen years 
together; the Lord of his mercy forgive me. The elevation 
is utterly to be rejected by reason of the adoring thereof. 
vSome churches, seeing we have put down the elevation, have 
followed us therein, which gives me great satisfaction. 

CCCLXIII. 

The operative cause of the sacrament is the word and in- 
stitution of Christ, who ordained it. The substance is bread 
and wine, prefiguring the true body and blood of Christ, 
which is spiritually received by faith. The final cause of 
instituting the same, is the benefit and the fruit, the strength- 
ening of our faith, not doubting that Christ's body and blood 
were given and shed for us, and that our sins by Christ's 
death certainly are forgiven. 

CCCLXIV. 

Question was made touching the words " given for you," 
whether they were to be understood of the present adminis- 
tering, when the sacrament is distributed, or of when it was 
ofi^ered and accomplished on the cross? I said. I like it best 
when they are understood of the present administering, 
although they may be understood as fulfilled on the cross; it 
matters not that Christ says: " Which is given for you," in- 
stead of : " Which shall be given for you :" for Christ is 
Hodie et Heri, to-day and yesterday. I am, says Ciirist, he 
that doeth it. Therefore, I approve that Datur be under- 



OF THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORD S SUPPER. 169 

stood in such manner, that it show the use of the work. It 
was likewise asked, whether honour and reverence were to be 
shown to the sacrament? I said: When I am at the altar, 
and receive the sacrament, I bow my knees in honour 
thereof; but in bed I receive it lying. 

CCCLXV. 

They that do not hold the sacrament as Christ instituted 
it, have no sacrament. All papists do not, therefore they 
have no sacrament; for they receive not the sacrament, 
but offer it. Moreover, they administer but one kind, con- 
trary to Christ's institution and command. The sacrament 
is God's work and ordinance, and not man's. The papists 
err in attributing to the sacrament, that it justifies, ex opere 
operato, when the work is fulfilled. 

CCCLXVI. 

These words, " Drink ye all of it," concern, say the 
papists, only the priests. Then these words must also concern 
only the priests, where Christ says: "Ye are clean, but not 
all," that is, all the priests. 



OF THE CHURCH. 

CCCLXVII. 

The true church is an assembly or congregation depending 
on that which does not appear, nor may be comprehended in 
the mind, namely, God's Word; what that says, they believe 
without addition, giving God the honour. 

CCCLXVIII. 

We tell our Lord God plainly, that if he will have his church, 
he must maintain and defend it; for we can neither uphold 
nor protect it; if we could, indeed, we should become the 
proudest asses under heaven. But God says: I say it, I do 
it: it is God only that speaks and does what he pleases; he 
does nothing according to the fancies of the ungodly, or 
which they hold for upright and good. 

CCCLXIX. 

The great and worldly-wise people take offence at the poor 
and mean form of our church, which is subject to many infir- 



170 Luther's table-talk. 

mities, transgressions, and sects, wherewith she is plagued; 
for they say the church should be altogether pure, holy, 
blameless, G-od's dove, &c. And the church, in the eyes and 
sight of God, has such an esteem; but in the eyes and sight 
of the world, she is like unto her bridegroom, Christ Jesus, 
torn, spit on, derided, and crucified. 

The similitude of the upright and true church and of 
Christ, is a poor silly sheep; but the similitude of the false 
and hypocritical church, is a serpent, an adder. 

CCCLXX. 

Where God's word is purely taught, there is also the up- 
right and true church; for the true church is supported by 
the Holy Ghost, not by succession of inheritance. It does 
not follow, though St. Peter had been bishop at Rome, and at 
the same time Christian communion had been at Rome, that, 
therefore, the pope and the Romish church are true; for if that 
should be of value or conclusive, then they must needs con- 
fess that Caiaphas, Annas, and the Sadducees were also the 
true church; for they boasted that they were descended from 
Aaron. 

CCCLXXI. 

It is impossible for the Christian and true church to sub- 
sist without the shedding of blood, for her adversary, the 
devil, is a liar and a murderer. The church grows and in- 
creases through blood; she is sprinkled with blood; she is 
spoiled and bereaved of her blood; when human creatures 
will reform the church, then it costs blood. 
cccLxxn. 

The form and aspect of the world is like a paradise; but 
the true Christian church, in the eye of the world, is foul, 
deformed, and offensive; yet, nevertheless, in the sight of 
God, she is precious, beloved, and highly esteemed. Aaron, 
the high-priest, appeared gloriously in the temple, with his 
ornaments and rich attire, with odoriferous and sweet-smelling 
perfumes; but Christ appeared most mean and lowly. 

Wherefore I am not troubled that the world esteems the 
church so meanly; what care I that the usurers, the nobility, 
gentry, citizens, country-people, covetous men, and drunkards, 
contemn and esteem me as dirt? In due time, I will esteem 
them as little. We must not suffer ourselves to be deceived 



OF THE OHURCfl. 171 

or troubled as to what the world thinks of us. To please the 
good is our virtue. 

CCCLXXIII. 

The church is misery on earth, first, that we may keep in 
mind we are banished servants, and exiled out of Paradise for 
Adam's sake. Secondly, that we may always remember the 
misery of the Son of God, who, for our sake, was made man, 
walked in this vale of misery, suffered for us, died, and rose 
again from the dead, and so brought us again to our paternal 
home, whence we were driven. Thirdly, that we may re- 
member our habitation is not of this world, but that we are 
here only as strangers and pilgrims; and that there is another 
and everlasting life prepared for us. 

CCCLXXIV. 

The very name, the church, is the highest argument and 
proof of all hypocrites. The pharisees, the scribes, yea, the 
whole senate of Jerusalem, cried out against Stephen, and 
said: "This man ceaseth not to speak blasphemous words 
against this holy place and the law." Cain, Ishmael, Saul, 
the Turks and Jews, bore and do bear the name and title of 
the church. But Moses finely solves this argument: " They 
have moved me to jealousy with that which is not God, they 
have provoked me to anger with their vanities : and I will 
move them to jealousy with those which are not a people : I 
will provoke them to anger with a foolish nation." Here 
was quid pro quo; as if God should say: " Could ye find in 
your hearts to forsake me? so can I again forsake you;" for 
God and nation, the Word and the church, are correlativa ; 
the one cannot be without the other. 

CCCLXXV. 

Like as a child in the mother's womb is compassed about 
with a thin and tender caul, which the Greeks name chorion 
(the after -birth), and needs no more sustenance than so much 
as the cotylidoneSy from which the fruit receives nourishment, 
bring with them; nor does the after-birth break, except the 
fruit be ripe, and about to be timely brought to the light of 
this world; even so the church also is inclosed in the word 
and bound therein, and seeks none other doctrine concerning 
God's will than that which is revealed in the same; there- 



172 Luther's table-talk. 

with she is content, and thereupon she remains and depends 
by faith, until she shall behold God's presence, and shall heat 
God himself preach of the mysteries and hidden things which 
on earth we see by faith. 

But in case some vain-glorious professors, by untimely 
motion, force and break the after-birth, as the papists and 
other seducers do in contemning the office of preaching, and 
expect visions and revelations from heaven, this must be 
compared with untimely births, still-born children, and 
abortions. 

CCCLXXVL 

The amaranth is a flower that grows in August: it is more 
a stalk than a flower, is easily broken off', and grows in joyful 
and pleasant sort; when all other flowers are gone and de- 
cayed, then this, being sprinkled with water, becomes fair 
and green again ; so that in winter they use to make garlands 
thereof. It is called amaranth from this, that it neither withers 
nor decays. 

I know nothing more like unto the church than this flower, 
amaranth. For although the church bathes her garment in 
the blood of the Lamb, and is coloured over with red, yet she 
is more fair, comely, and beautiful than any state and assem- 
bly upon the face of the earth. She alone is embraced and 
beloved of the Son of God, as his sweet and amiable spouse, 
in whom only he takes joy and delight, and whereon his 
heart alone depends; he utterly rejects and loathes others, 
that contemn or falsify his gospel. 

JMoreover, the church willingly suffers herself to be plucked 
and broken off, that is, she is loving, patient, and obedient to 
Christ her bridegroom in the cross; she growls and increases 
again, fair, joyful, and pleasant, that is, she gains the greatest 
fruit and profit thereby; she learns to know God aright, to 
call upon him freely and undauntedly, to confess his word 
and doctrine, and produces many fair and glorious virtues. 

At last, the body and stalk remain whole and sound, and 
cannot be rooted out, although raging and swelling be made 
against some of the members, and these be torn away. For 
like as the amaranth never withers or decays, even so, the 
church can never be destroyed or rooted out. But what is 
most wonderful, the amaranth has this quality, that when it 
IS sprinkled with w^ater, and dipped therein, it becomes fresh 



OF THE CHURCH. 173 

and green again, as if it were raised and wakened from the 
dead. Even so likewise the church will by God be raised and 
wakened out of the grave, and become living again; will ever- 
lastingly praise, extol, and laud the Father of our Lord and 
Saviour Jesus Christ, his Son and our Redeemer, together with 
the Holy Ghost. For though temporal empires, kingdoms, and 
principalities have their changings, and like flowers soon fall 
and fade away, this kingdom, which is so deep rooted, by no 
power can be destroyed or wasted, but remains eternally. 

CCCLXXVII. 

An olive tree will live and bear fruit two hundred years; 
'tis an image of the church; oil symbolizes the gentle love of 
the gosprl, as wine emblems the doctrine of the law\ There is 
such a natural unity and afiinity between the vine and the olive 
tree, that when the branch of a vine is grafted upon an olive 
tree, it bears both grapes and olives. In like manner, when 
the church, which is God's Word, is planted in people's 
hearts, then it teaches both the law and the gospel, using both 
doctrines, and from both bringing fruit. The chesnut tree, 
in that it produces all the better fruit when it is soundly 
beaten, shadows forth man submissive to the law, whose 
actions are not agreeable to God, until he has been tried by 
tribulation. The lemon tree, with its fruit, figures Christ; the 
lemon tree has the property of bearing fruit at all seasons; 
when its fruits are ripe, they drop off, and are succeeded by a 
fresh growth; and this fruit is a sure remedy against poison. 
Jesus Christ, when his ministers and champions depart from 
earth, replaces them by others; his produce is ever growing, 
and it is a sure remedy against the poison of the devil. 

CCCLXXVIII. 

I much marvel that the pope extols his church at Rome as 
the chief, whereas the church at Jerusalem is the mother; for 
there the doctrine w^as first revealed, and set forth by Christ, 
the Son of God himself, and by his apostles. Next w^as the 
church at Antiocli, w^hence the Christians have their name. 
Thirdly, w^as the church at Alexandria; and still before the 
Romish, were the churches of the Galatians, of the Corinth- 
ians, Ephesians, of the Philippians, &c. Is it so great a matter 
that St. Peter was at Rome? which, however, has never yet 



174 

been, nor ever will be proved, whereas our blessed Saviour 
Christ himself w^as at Jerusalem, where all the articles of our 
Christian faith were made; where St. James received his 
orders, and was bishop, and where the pillars of the church 
had their seat. 

CCCLXXIX. 

The papists rely upon this: the church cannot err; we are 
the church, ergo, we cannot err. To the major, I make this 
answer: true, the church cannot err in doctrine, but in works 
and actions she may easily err, yea, and often does err; and 
therefore she prays: "Forgive us our trespasses," &c. The 
minor I utterly deny. Therefore when they argue and say: 
"What the church teaches uprightly and pure, is true, this 
we admit; but when they argue and say: what the church 
does is upright and true, this we deny. 

CCCLXXX. 

Many boast of their title to the church, whereas they know 
not the true church; the holy prophets much opposed the 
false church. The prophet Isaiah, in the beginning of his 
first chapter, describes two sorts of churches. The upright 
and true church is a very small heap and number, of little or 
no esteem, and lying under the cross. But the false church 
is pompous, boasting, and presuming; she flourishes, and is 
held in high repute, like Sodom, of which St. Paul complains, 
Romans viii. and ix. The true church consists in God's 
election and calling ; she is powerful and strong in weakness. 

CCCLXXXI. 

One of the jugglings of the sophists, wherewith the ungodly 
wretches deceive simple people, is this: a kingdom, say they, 
which is plagued and tormented, is a temporal kingdom. The 
Christian church is plagued and tormented: ergo, Christ's 
kingdom is a temporal kingdom. But I answer them: No, 
not so ; the kingdom of Christ is not plagued, but our bodies, 
by reason of our sins, are plagued and tormented. As St. Paul 
says: " We must through much tribulation enter into the 
kingdom of God.'' He says not that the kingdom of God 
suffers externally. It is equally false when they say, God 
is love, God justifies, therefore love justifies. 



OF EXCOMMUNICATION. 175 

Such, and the like fallacies, may sometimes puzzle even 
understanding minds, well exercised and practised; therefore 
we must take time to answer them, for every one cannot so 
suddenly detect them. 



OF EXCOMMUNICATION. 

CCCLXXXII. 

The ungodly have great power, riches, and respect; on the con- 
trary, we, the true and upright Christians, have but only one 
poor, silly, and contemned Christ. Temporal things, money, 
wealth, reputation, and power they have already; they care no- 
thing for Christ. We say to them: Ye are great lords on earth, 
we, lords in heaven; ye have the power and riches on earth, we, 
heavenly treasure, namely, God's Word and command; we 
have baptism, and the sacrament of the Lord's Supper, which 
is an office celestial. If any man among us, with the name 
of a Christian, w^iil exercise unjust power, insolence, and 
wickedness, wilfully, then we excommunicate such a person, 
so that he shall not be present at the baptizing of children, nor 
shall be partaker of the holy communion, nor have conversa- 
tion with other Christians. 

But if he abandon and forsake the name of a Christian, and 
give up his profession, then we are willing with patience to 
suffer his tyranny, insolence, and usurped power; we are con- 
tent to let him go like the heathen, or Jews, or Turks, and 
so commit our cause to God. 

CCCLXXXIII. 

Our dealing and proceeding against the pope is altogether 
excommunication, which is simply the public declaration that 
a person is disobedient to Christ's word. Now we affirm in 
public, that the pope and his retinue believe not; therefore 
we conclude that he shall not be saved, but be damned. 
What is this, but to excommunicate him? Briefly, to put 
Christ's word in execution, and to accomplish and execute 
his command, this is excommunication. 



] 76 LUTHER S TABLE-TALK. 

CCCLXXXIV. 

I will proceed with excommunication after this manner 
first, when I myself have admonished an obstinate sinner 
then I will send unto him two persons, as two chaplains, or 
two of the aldermen of the town, two churchwardens, or 
two honest men of the assembly; if then he will not be 
reformed, but still runs on in stubbornness, and persists in 
his sinful life, I will declare him openly to the church in 
this manner: Loving friends, I declare unto you, that JV. JV. 
has been admonished, first by myself in private; afterwards 
also by two chaplains; thirdly, by two aldermen, or two church- 
wardens, as it may be, yet he will not desist from his sinful 
kind of life; wherefore, I earnestly desire you to assist, and 
advise you to kneel down with me, and let us pray against 
him, and deliver him over to the devil, &c. 

Hereby we should doubtless prevail so far, that people 
would not live in such public sin and shame; for this would 
be a strict excommunication, not like the pope's money-bulls, 
profitable to the church. When the person were reformed 
and converted, we might receive him into the church again. 

CCCLXXXV. 

Christ will have that a sinner be first warned and admo- 
nished, not only once or twice by private and single persons 
not in ofiice, but also by them that are in ofiit:e of public 
preaching, before the severe sentence of excommunication be 
published and declared. But while the ministry of the Word 
calls to the Lord's Supper all such of the faithful as repent 
of their sins, and admits them to the bosom of Christ's 
church, it must justly reject the hardened impenitent, and 
abandon them to the judgment of God, excluding them here 
from the society of the faithful, and, should they die in their 
sins, from Christian burial. 

CCCLXXXVI. 

Nothing would more hinder excommunication than for 
men to do what pertains to a Christian. Thou hast a neigh- 
bour whose life and conversation is well known unto thee, 
but unknown to thy preacher or minister: When thou seest 
viiis neighbour growing rich by unlawful dealing, living 
lasciviously, in adultery, &c.; that he governs his house and 
family negligently, &c.; then thou oughtest, Christian-like, 



OF EXCOMMUNICATION. 177 

to warn and earnestly admonish him to desist from his sinful 
courses, to have a care of his salvation, and to abstain from 
giving offence. Oh, how holy a work wouldst then thou 
perform, didst thou in this way win thy neighbour? But I 
pray, who does this? for, first, truth is a hateful thing; he 
that, in these time.>=, speaks the truth, procures hatred. 
Therefore, thou wilt rather keep thy neighbour's friendship 
and good-will, especially when he is rich and powerful, by 
holding thy peace and keeping silence, and conniving, than 
incur his displeasure and make him thy adversary. 

Again, we have less excommunication now, forasmuch as . 
in some sort we are all subject to blaspheming alike, and 
therewith are stained; so that we are afraid to pull out the 
mote we see in our neighbour's eye, lest we be hit in the 
teeth with the beam that appears in our own. 

But the chief cause why excommunication is fallen, is that 
the number of upright and true Christians in every place is 
very small; for, if from our hearts we loved and practised 
true and upright godliness and God's Word, as we all 
ought, then we should regard the command of Christ our 
blessed Saviour far above all the wealth, welfiire, or favour 
of this temporal life. For this command of Christ, touching 
the admonishing and warning a sinning brother, is even as 
necessary as this:. "Thou shalt do no murder, thou shalt not 
commit adultery, not steal," &c., seeing that when, either 
out of fear or for some other worldly respect, thou omittest 
this admonition, there depends thereon, not thy neighbour's 
body and goods, but the salvation of his soul. 

C'CCLXXXVII. 

Take heed, I say, that in any case thou contemn not the 
excommunication of the true church, a contempt certainly 
involving the displeasure or Grod; tor Christ says: "Verily 
I say unto you, what ye bind on earth, shall be also bound in 
heaven," &c. The pope, however, in his tyranny, abuses the 
power of excommunication. If a poor man, at a certain 
appointed day, cannot make payment of the taxation the 
pope imposes upon him, he is excommunicated; and in the 
same way he thunders his bulls and his excommunications 
against us, because we avow the all-saving doctrine of 
the gospel; yet our Saviour Christ comforts us, saying: 



178 Luther's table-talk. 

"Happy are ye when men revile and persecute you for my 
sake, and speak all manner of evil against you," &c. And 
again: " They will excommunicate you, or put you out of the 
synagogue." 

Most assuredly the pope's bull is not Christ's excommuni- 
cation, by reason it is not done or taken in hand according to 
Christ's institution; it is of no value in heaven, but to him, 
who thus abuses it against Christ's command, it brings most 
sure and certain destruction, for it is a sin wherewdth God's 
name is blasphemed. 

CCCLXXXVIII. 

Like as this external and visible excommunication is used 
against those only that live in public sins, even so the hidden 
and invisible excommunication, which is not of men, or done 
by men visibly, but is of God himself, and done by him only, 
often excludes from the kingdom of Christ, invisibly, persons 
whom we take to be fair, upright, good, and honest Chris- 
tians. For God judges not according to outward works or 
kind of life, as men do, but views the heart; he judges hypo- 
crites whom the church can neither judge nor punish; the 
church judges not what is hidden and invisible. 

All are not stained so grossly with open offences, that 
we can tax them in public, as were fitting, with any one 
particular sin and transgression. For although many cove- 
tous persons, adulterers, &c., are among us, yet they proceed 
so craftily, and in such sort act their sins, that we cannot 
detect them. Yet although such be with us in the church, 
among the Christian assembly, hear sermons and God's 
"Word, and, with, upright and godly Christians, receive the 
holy sacrament, yet, de facto, they are excommunicated by 
God, by reason they live in sin against their own con- 
sciences, and amend not their lives. Such sinners may deceive 
men, but they cannot deceive God; he at the day of judg- 
ment will cause his angels to gather all offenders together, 
and will cast them into unquenchable fire. 

CCCLXXXIX. 

Christ says: "Receive ye the Holy Ghost, whosesoever 
sins je remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose- 
soever sins ye retain, they are retained." And "If thy 
brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault 



OF PREACHERS AND PREACHING. 179 

between thee, and him alone; if he shall hear thee, thou hast 
gained thy brother. But if he will not hear thee, then take 
with thee one or two more," &c. ; and " If he shall neglect to 
hear them, tell it unto the church. But if he neglect to hear 
the church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man, and a 
publican." And St. Paul: "If any man that is called a 
brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a 
railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such an one, 
eat not, &c.,: put away from you that wicked person." 
Also: " If there come any to you, and bring not this doctrine, 
receive him not unto your house, neither bid him God speed; 
for he that biddeth him God speed, is partaker of his evil 
deeds." 

These, and such like sentences, are the unchangeable will, 
decrees, and ordinances of the high Majesty of God; we 
have no power to alter or omit them, much less to abolish 
them ; but, on the contrary, have earnest command, with true 
diligence to hold thereunto, disregarding the power or repu- 
tation of any person whatsoever. And although excommu- 
nication in Popedom has been and is shamefully abused, and 
made a mere torment, yet we must not suffer it to fall, but 
make right use of it, as Christ has commanded, to the raising 
of the church, not to exercise tyranny, as the pope has done. 



OF PREACHERS AND PREACHING. 



cccxc. 

Some there are that rail at the servants of God, and say: 
What though the Word and sacraments be upright and the 
truth, as indeed they be, when God speaks of them; 'tis not 
therefore God's Word when a man talks thereof. 

cccxci. 
Divinity consists in use and practice, not in speculation 
and meditation. Every one that deals in speculations, eitner 
in household affairs or temporal government, without prac- 
tice, is lost and nothing worth. When a tradesman maKes 

n2 



180 Luther's table-talk. 

his account, how much profit he shall reap in the year, but 
puts nothing in practice, he trades in vain speculations, and 
finds afterwards that his reckoning comes far too short. And 
thus it goes also with speculating divines, as is seen to this 
day, and as I know by experience. 

CCCXCII. 

Ko man should undertake anything, except he be called 
thereunto. Calling is two-fold; either divine, which is done 
by the highest power, which is of faith; or else it is a calling 
of love, which is done by one's equal, as when one is desired 
by one's friend to preach a sermon. Both vocations are ne- 
cessary to secure the conscience. 

CCCXCIIl. 

Young people must be brought up to learn the Hjly Scrip- 
tures; when such of them as know they are designed for the 
ministry present themselves and offer their service, upon a 
parish falling void, they do not intrude themselves, but are 
as a maid who, being arrived at woman's estate, when one 
makes suit to marry her, may do it, with a good and safe con- 
science towards God and the world. To thrust out another 
is to intrude; but when in the church a place is void, and 
thou sayest: I will willingly supply it, if ye please to make 
use of r °; then thou art received, it is a true vocation and 
calling. Such was the manner of Isaiah, who said: " Here 
I am ; send me." He came of himself when he heard they 
stood in need of a preacher; and so it ought to be; we must 
look whether people have need of us or no, and then whether 
we be desired or called. 

cccxciv. 
To the poor is the gospel declared, for the rich regard it 
not. If the pope maintained us not with that he has got, 
though much against his will, we might even starve for want 
of food. The pope has swallowed stolen goods, and must 
spew them all up again, as Job says: he must give them to 
those to whom he wishes evil. Scarce the fiftieth part is ap- 
plied to the profit of the church; the rest he throws away; 
we obtain but the fragments under the table. But we are 
assurea of better wages after this life; and, truly, if our hope 
were not fixed there, we were of all people the most miserable. 



OF PREACHERS AND PREACHING. 181 

CCCXCV. 

I would not have preachers torment their hearers, and de- 
tain them with long and tedious preaching, for the delight of 
hearing vanishes therewith, and the preachers hurt themselves. 

cccxcvi. 
God was at Moses six several times before he could get 
him forward; at last, after many excuses, he went, but un- 
willingly. If I had been Moses, I would, with the aid of 
some lawyer, have framed a bill of complaint against our Lord 
God, for breaking his promise; for he said to Moses: " I will 
be with thee," but he performed not what he promised. In 
like manner God comforts and encourages with similar pro- 
mises in" the gospel, saying: " And ye shall find rest for your 
souls." But, alas! we see and find the contrary, by John the 
Baptist, by his dearest Son, our blessed Saviour Christ Jesus, 
by all the saints and holy martyrs, and by all true Christians ; 
so that, according to the lawyers, our Lord God has lost the 
cause. Christ spake unto me as he spake to St. Paul: 
" Arise and preach, and I will be with thee." I have read 
that as an example. It is, indeed, an office exceeding dan- 
gerous to preach Christ; had I known as much before as I 
know now, I should never have been drawn thereunto, but, 
with Moses, would have said: " Send whom thou wilt send." 

cccxcvii. 

One asked me: Which is greater and better — to strive 
against adversaries, or to admonish and lift up the weak? I 
answered: Both are very good and necessary; but the latter 
is somewhat preferable; the weak, by striving against the 
adversaries, are also edified and bettered — both are God's 
gifts. He that teaches, attend his teaching; he that admo- 
nishes, attend his admonishing. 

CCCXCVIII. 

Dr. Forsteim asked Luther whence the art proceeded of 
speaking so powerfully, that both God-fearing and ungodly 
people were moved? He answered: it proceeds from the 
first commandment of God: " I am the Lord thy God;" i. e., 
against the ungodly I am a strong and jealous God, towards 
the good and godly, a merciful God; I do well and show 
mercy to them, &c. For he will have us preach heil-fire to 



182 Luther's table-talk. 

the proud and haughty, and paradise to the godly, reprove 
the wicked, and comfort the good, &c. The instruments and 
work-tools of God are different, even as one knife cuts better 
than another. The sermons of Dr. Cordatus and Dr. Cru- 
ciger are taken more to heart than the preaching of many 
others. 

cccxcix. 

The world can well endure all sorts of preachers except 
us, whom they will not hear; in former times they were 
forced, under Popedom, to hear the ungodly tyrants, and to 
carry those on their shoulders that plagued them in body and 
soul, in wealth and honour. But us, who by God's com- 
mand reprove them, they will not tear: therefore the world 
must go to rack. We must vanish by reason of poverty, but 
the papists, by reason of punishment; their goods are not of 
proof, and are rejected of God. 

cccc. 
A good preacher should have these properties and virtues: 
first, to teach systematically; secondly, he should have a ready 
wit; thirdly, he should be eloquent; fourthly, he should have 
a good voice; fifthly, a good memory; sixthly, he should 
know when to make an end; seventhly, he should be sure of 
his doctrine; eighthly, he should venture and engage body 
and blood, wealth and honour, in the word; ninthly, he should 
suffer himself to be mocked and jeered of every one. 

CCCCL 

The defects in a preacher are soon spied ; let a preacher be 
endued with ten virtues, and but one fault, yet this one fault 
will eclipse and darken all his virtues and gifts, so evil is the 
world in these times. Dr. Justus Jonas has all the good 
virtues and qualities a man may have; yet merely because 
he hums and spits, the people cannot bear that good and 
honest man. 

CCCCII. 

Luther's wife said to him: Sir, I heard your cousin, John 
Palmer, preach this afternoon in the parish church, whom I 
understood better than Dr. Pomer, though the Doctor is held 
to be a very excellent preacher. Luther answered: John 
Paimer preaches as ye women use to talk; for what comes 
into your minds, ye speak. A preacher ought to remain by 



OF PREACHERS AND PREACHING. 183 

the text, and deliver that which lie has before him, to the 
end people may well understand it. But a preacher that will 
speak everything that comes in his mind, is like a maid that 
goes to market, and meeting another maid, makes a stand, 
and they hold together a goose-market. 

CCCCIII. 

An upright shepherd and minister must improve his flock by 
edification, and also resist and defend it; otherwise, if resist- 
ing be absent, the wolf devours the sheep, and the rather, 
where they be fat and well fed. Therefore St. Paul presses 
it home upon Titus, that a bishop by sound doctrine should 
be able both to exhort and to convince gainsayers; that is, to 
resist false doctrine. A preacher must be both soldier and 
shepherd. He must nourish, defend, and teach; he must 
have teeth in his mouth, and be able to bite and to fight. 

There are many talking preachers, but there is nothing in 
them save only words; they can talk much, but teach nothing 
uprightly. The world has always had such Thrasos, such 
boasting throat-criers. 

CCCCIV. 

I know of no greater gift than that we have, namely, har- 
mony in doctrine, so that throughout the principalities and 
imperial cities of Germany, they teach in conformity with us. 
Though I had the gift to raise the dead, what were it, if all 
other preachers taught against me? I would not exchange 
this concord for the Turkish empire. 

ccccv. 

God often lays upon the necks of haughty divines all manner 
of crosses and plagues to humble them; and therein they are 
well and rightly served; for they will have honour, whereas 
this only belongs to our Lord God. "When we are found true 
in our vocations and calling, then we have reaped honour 
sufficient, though not in this life, yet in that to come; there 
we shall be crowned with the unchangeable crown of honour, 
" which is laid up for us." Here on earth we must seek for no 
honour, for it is written: Woe unto you when men shall bless 
you. We belong not to this life, but to another far better. 
The world loves that which is its own; we must content our- 
selves with that which it bestows upon us, scoffing, flouting, 
and contempt. I am sometimes glad that my scholars and 



^84 Luther's table-talk. 

friends are pleased to give me such wages; I desire neither 
honour nor crown here on earth, but I will have compensation 
from God, the just judge in heaven. 

From the year of our Lord 1518, to the present time, every 
Maunday Thursday, at Rome, I have been by the pope ex- 
communicated and cast into hell; yet I still live. For every 
year, on Maunday Thursday, all heretics are excommunicated 
at Kome, among whom I am always put first and chief. This 
do they on that blessed, sanctified day, whereas they ought 
rather to render thanks to God for the great benefit of his 
holy supper, and for his bitter death and passion. This is the 
honour and crown we must expect and have in this world. 
God sometimes can endure honour in lawyers and physicians; 
but in divines he will no way suflTer it; for a boasting and an 
ambitious preacher soon contemns Christ, who with his blood 
has redeemed poor sinners. 

ccccvi. 
A preacher should needs know how to make a right differ- 
ence between sinners, between the impenitent and confident, 
and the sorrowful and penitent; otherwise the whole Scrip- 
ture is locked up. When Amsdorf began to i)reach before 
the princes at Schmalcalden, with great earnestness he said : 
The gospel belongs to the poor and sorrowful, and not to you 
princes, great persons and courtiers that live in continual joy 
and delight, in secureness, void of all tribulation. 

CCCCVII. 

A continual hatred is between the clergy and laity, and not 
without cause ; for the unbridled people, citizens, gentry, 
nobility, yea, and great princes also, refuse to be reproved. 
But the office of a preacher is to reprove such sinners as lie 
in open sin, and offend against both the first and second 
table of God's commandments; yet reproof is grievous for 
them to hear, wherefore they look upon the preachers with 
sharp eyes. 

ccccvin. 

To speak deUberately and slowly best becomes a preacher; 
for thereby he may the more effectually and impressively 
deliver his sermon. Seneca writes of Cicero, that he spake 
deliberately from the heart. 



OF PREACHERS AND PREACHING. 185 

CCCCIX. 

God in the Old Testament made the priests rich; Annas 
and Caiaphas had great revenues. But the ministers of the 
Word, in which is offered everlasting life and salvation by 
grace, are suffered to die of hunger and poverty, yea, are 
di'iven and hunted away. 

ccccx. 
We ought to direct ourselves in preaching according to the 
condition of the hearers, but most preachers commonly fail 
herein; they preach that which little edifies the poor simple 
people. To preach plain and simply is a great art: Christ 
himself talks of tilling ground, of mustard- seed, &c.; he used 
altogether homely and simple similitudes. 

ccccxi. 
When a man first comes into the pulpit, he is much per- 
plexed to see so many heads before him. When I stand 
there I look upon none, but imagine they are all blocks that 
are before me. 

CCCCXII. 

I would not have preachers in their sermons use Hebrew, 
Greek, or foreign languages, for in the church we ought to 
speak as we use to do at home, the plain mother tongue, which 
every one is acquainted with. It may bt^ allowed in courtiers, 
lawyers, advocates, &c., to use quaint, curious words. Doctor 
Staupitz is a very learned man, yet he is a very irksome 
preacher; and the people had rather hear a plain brother 
preach, that delivers his words simply to their understanding, 
than he. In churches no praising or extolling should be 
sought after. St. Paul never used such high and stately 
words as Demosthenes and Cicero did, but he spake, properly 
and plainly, words which signified and showed high and 
stately matters, and he did well. 

CCCCXIIT. 

If I should write of the heavy burthen of a godly preacher, 
which he must carry and endure, as I know by mine own 
experience, I should scare every man from the office of 
preaching. But I assure myself that Christ at the last day 
will speak friendly unto me, though he speaks very un- 
kindly now. I bear upon me the malice of the whole world. 



186 Luther's table-talk. 

the hatred of the emperor, of the pope, and of all their retinue. 
Well, on in God's name; seeing I am come into the lists, I 
will fight it out. I know my quarrel and cause are upright 
and just. 

ccccxiv. 
It is a great thing to be an upright minister and preacher; 
if our Lord God himself drove it not forward, there would 
but little good ensue. Preachers must be endued with a 
great spirit, to serve people in body and soul, in wealth and 
honour, and yet, nevertheless, suifer and endure the greatest 
danger and unthankfulness. Hence Christ said to Petei 
thrice: "Peter, lovest thou me?" Afterwards he said: " Feed 
my sheep;" as if to say: Peter, if thou w^ilt be an upright 
shepherd, and careful of souls, then thou must love me; other- 
wise, it is impossible for thee to be an upright and a careful 
shepherd; thy love to me must do the deed. 

ccccxv. 
Our manner of life is as evil as is that of the papists. 
Wickliffe and Huss assailed the immoral conduct of papists; 
but I chiefly oppose and resist their doctrine; I affirm roundly 
and plainly, that they preach not the truth. To this am I 
called; I take the goose by the neck, and set the knife to its 
throat. When I can show that the papist's doctrine is false, 
which I have shown, then I can easily prove that their 
manner of life is evil. For when the word remains pure, the 
manner of life, though something therein be amiss, will be 
pure also. The pope has taken away the pure word and doc- 
trine, and brought in another word and doctrine, w^hich he has 
hanged upon the church. I shook all Popedom with this one 
point, that I teach uprightly, and mix up nothing else. We 
must press the doctrine onwards, for that breaks the neck of 
the pope. Therefore the prophet Daniel rightly pictured the 
pope, that he would be a king that would do according to his 
own will, that is, would regard neither spirituality nor tem- 
porality, but say roundly: Thus and thus will I have it. For 
the pope derives his institution neither from divine nor from 
human right; but is a self-chosen human creature and in- 
truder. Therefore the pope must needs confess, that he 
governs neither by divine nor human command. Daniel 
calls him a god, Maosim ; he had almost spoken it plainly 



OF PREACHERS AND PREACHING. 187 

out, and said Mass, which word is written, Deut. xxvi. St. 
Paul read Daniel thoroughly, and uses nearly his words, 
where he says: The son of perdition will exalt himself above 
all that is called God, or that is worshipped, &c., 2 Thes. ii. 

ccccxvi. 
The humility of hypocrites is, of all pride, the greatest and 
most haughty, as that of the Pharisee who humbled himself 
and gave God thanks, but soon spoiled all again, when he 
said: " I am not like others, &c., nor as this publican." There 
are people who flatter themselves, and think they only are 
wise; they contemn and deride the opinions of all others; 
they wiU allow of nothing but only what pleases them. 

ccccxvii. 
Ambition is the rankest poison to the church, when it 
possesses preachers. It is a consuming fire. The Holy 
Scripture is given to destroy the desires of the flesh; there- 
fore we must not therein seek after temporal honour. I much 
marvel for what cause people are proud and haughty; w^e are 
born in sin, and every moment in danger of death. Are we 
proud of our scabs and scalds? we, who are altogether an 
unclean thing. 

CCCCXVIII. 

Honour might be sought for in Homer, Virgil, and in 
Terence, and not in the Holy Scripture; for Christ says: 
" Hallowed be thy name — not ours, but thine be the glory." 
Christ charges us to preach God's Word. We preachers 
should of the world be held and esteemed as injusti stulti, to 
the end God he Justus, sapiens, et misericors; that is his title, 
which he will leave to none other. When we leave to God 
his name, his kingdom, and will, then will he also give unto 
us our daily bread, remit our sins, and deliver us from the 
devil and all evil. Only his honour he will have to himself. 

CCCCXIX. 

It were but reasonable I should in my old age have some 
rest and peace, but now those that should be with and 
for me, fall upon me. I have plague enough with my adver- 
saries, therefore my brethren should not vex me. But who 
is able to resist? They are fresh, lusty, young people, and 



188 

have lived in idleness; 1 am now aged, and have had much 
labour and pains. Nothing causes Osiander's pride more 
than his idle life; for he preaches but twice a week, yet has 
a yearly stipend of four hundred guilders. 

ccccxx. 

God in wonderful wise led us out of the darkness of the 
sophists, and cast me into the game, now more than twenty 
years since. It went weakly forward at the first, when I 
began to write against the gross error of indulgences. At 
that time Doctor Jerome withstood me, and said: What will 
you do, they will not endure it? but, said I, what if they 
must endure it? 

Soon after him came Silvester Prierio into the list; he thun- 
dered and lightned against me with his syllogisms, saying: 
Whosoever makes doubt of any one sentence or act of the 
Romish church, is a heretic: Martin Luther doubts thereof; 
ergo, he is a heretic. Then it went on, for the pope makes 
a three-fold distinction of the church. First, a substantial, 
i. e., the body of the church. Secondly, a significant church, 
i. e., the cardinals. Thirdly, an operative and powerful 
church; i. e., the pope himself. No mention is made of a 
council, for the pope will be the powerful church above the 
Holy Scripture and councils. 

ccccxxi. 

Our auditors, for the most part, are epicurean; they mea- 
sure our preaching as they think good, and will have easy days. 

The Pharisees and Sadducees were Christ's enemies, yet 
they heard him willingly; the Pharisees, to the end they 
might lay hold on him; the Sadducees, that they might flout 
and deride him. The Pharisees are our friars; the Sad- 
ducees, our gentry, citizens, and country folk : our gentlemen 
give us the hearing, and believe us, yet will do what seems 
good to them ; that is, they remain epicureans. 

CCCCXXII. 

A preacher should be a logician and a rhetorician, that is, 
he must be able to teach, and to admonish ; when he preaches 
touching an article, he must, first, distinguish it. Secondly, 
he must define, describe, and show what it is. Thirdly, he 



OF TREACIIERS AND PREACHING. 189 

must produce sentences out of the Scriptures, therewith to 
prove and strengthen it. Fourthly, he must, with examples, 
explain and declare it. Fifthly, he must adorn it with simi- 
litudes; and, lastly, he must admonish and rouse up the lazy, 
earnestly reprove all the disobedient, all false doctrine, and 
the authors thereof; yet, not out of malice and envy, but 
only to God's honour, and the profit and saving health of the 
people. 

CCCCXXIII. 

" Their priests do teach for hire." Some there be (\^ho 
abuse this sentence, w^resting it against good and godly 
teachers and preachers, as if it were not right for them to 
take the wages ordained for the ministers of the church, on 
which they must live. They produce the sentence where 
Christ says: " Freely ye have received, freely give;" they 
allege also the example of St. Paul, who maintained himself 
by the work of his hands, to the end he might not be bur- 
thensome to the church. 

These accusations proceed out of hatred to the function of 
preaching, to which Satan is a deadly enemy. These ungodly 
people, by filling the ears of the simple with such speeches, 
not only occasion the preachers to be condemned, but also the 
function of preaching to be suspected; whereas they ought, 
with all diligence, to endeavour that the ministers, for the 
Word's sake, might again be restored to their honest dignity. 

It is true, as Christ says: " Freely ye have received, freely 
give;" for he will have the chief end of preaching to be 
directed to God's honour only, and the people's salvation; 
but it follows not that it is against God for the church to 
maintain her ministers, who truly serve her in the Word, 
though it were against God and all Christianity, if the minis- 
ters of the church should omit the final cause, for which the 
office of preaching is instituted, and should look and have 
regard only to their w^ages, or aim at lucre and gain, and not 
uprightly, purely, and truly proceed in the office of teaching. 

Like as the ministers of the church, by God's command, are in 
duty bound to seek and promote God's honour, and the saving 
health and salvation of the people, with true and upright 
doctrine, even so the church and congregation have command 
from God to maintain their ministers, and honourably nourish 



190 Luther's table-talk. 

and cherish them; for Christ says: " Every labourer is worthy 
of his hire." Now, if he be worthy, then no man ought to 
cast it in his teeth that he takes wages. St. Paul more 
clearly expresses himself: " The Lord hath also commanded, 
that they which preach the gospel, should live of the gospel." 
He puts on the office of the law, and says: " Do ye not know, 
that they which do minister about holy things, live of the 
things of the temple? And they which wait at the altar, are 
partakers with the altar." Moreover, he makes use of very fine 
similitude, saying: "Who goeth a warfare at any time at his own 
charges? "Who planteth a vineyard, and eateth not of the fruit 
thereof?" But especially mark the comparison which he gives 
in his Epistle to the Corinthians: " If we have sown unto you 
spiritual thiners, is it a great matter if we shall reap your 
carnal things?" Indeed, every Christian, but especially the 
officers of the church, ministers, and preachers, should so 
carry themselves that they fall not into suspicion of being 
greedy and covetous; yet they must not so conceive it, as if it 
were wrong to receive of the church and assembly, that which 
is needful for the maintenance of the body. 

Therefore no man should take umbrage that godly rulers 
provide for the churches, by honestly maintaining her true 
ministers; nay, we should bewail that the majority of princes 
and rulers neglect the true and pure rehgion, and provide 
not for our children and posterity, so that, through such 
meanness, there will be either none, or most unlearned 
ministers. 

ccccxxiv. 

Scripture requires humble hearts, that hold God's Word 
in honour, love, and worth, and that pray continually: " Lord, 
teach me thy ways and statutes." But the Holy Ghost re- 
sists the proud, and will not dwell with them. And although 
some for a time diligently study in Holy Scripture and teach 
and preach Christ uprightly, yet, as soon as they become 
proud, God excludes them out of the church. Therefore, 
every proud spirit is a heretic, not in act and deed, yet before- 
God. 

But it is a hard matter for one who has some particular 
gift and quality above another, not to be haughty, proud, and 
presumptuous, and not to contemn others; therefore God 



OF PREACHERS AND PREACHING. 191 

suiFers them that have great gifts to fall many times into 
heavy tribulations, to the end they may learn, when God 
draws away his hand, that then they are of no value. St. 
Paul was constrained to bear on his body the sting or thorn of 
the flesh, to preserve him from haughtiness. And if Philip 
Melancthon were not now and then plagued in such sort as 
he is, he would have strange conceits. 

ccccxxv. 

I learn by preaching to know what the world, the flesh, the 
malice and wickedness of the devil is, all which could not be 
know^n before the gospel was revealed and preached, for up 
to that time I thought there were no sins but incontinence 
and lechery. 

ccccxxvi. 

At court these rules ought to be observed: we must cry 
aloud, and accuse; for neither the go-pel nor modesty belong 
to the court; we must be harsh, and set our faces as flints; 
we must, instead of Christ, who is mild and friendly, place 
Moses with his horns in the court. Therefore I advise my 
chaplains and ministers to complain at court of their w^ants, 
miseries, poverty, and necessities; for I myself preached 
concerning the same before the prince elector, who is both 
good and godly, but his courtiers do what they please. 
Philip Melancthon and Justus Jonas were lately called in 
question at court, for the world's sake; but they made this 
answer: Luther is old enough, and knows how and what to 
preach. 

ccccxxvii. 

Cursed are all preachers that in the church ami at high and 
hard things, and, neglecting the saving health of the poor un- 
learned people, seek their own honour and praise, and there- 
with to please one or two ambitious persons. 

When I preach, I sink myself deep down. I regard 
neither Doctors nor Magistrates, of whom are here in this 
church above forty; but I have an eye to the multitude of 
young people, children, and servants, of whom are more tli.-tn 
two thousand. I preach to those, directing myself to them 
that have need thereof. Will not the rest hear me? The 
door stands open unto them; they may begone. I see that 
the ambition of preachers grows and increases; this wiU do 



192 Luther's table-talk. 

the utmost mischief in the church, and produce great dis- 
quietness and discord; for they will needs teach high things 
touching matters of state, thereby aiming at praise and 
honour; they will please the worldly wise, and meantime 
neglect the simple and common multitude. 

An upright, godly, and true preacher should direct his 
preaching to the poor, simple sort of people, like a mother 
that stills her child, dandles and plays with it, presenting it 
with milk from her own breast, and needing neither malmsey 
nor muscadin for it. In such sort should also preachers carry 
themselves, teaching and preaching plainly, that the simple 
and unlearned may conceive and comprehend, and retain what 
they say. When they come to me, to Melancthon, to Dr. 
Pomer, &c., let them show their cunning, how learned they 
be; they shall be well put to their trumps. But to sprinkle 
out Hebrew, Greek, and Latin in their public sermons, savours 
merely of show, according with neither time nor place. 

ccccxxvin. 

In the Psalm it is said: Their voice went out into the whole 
world. But St. Paul to the Komans gives it thus: "Their 
sound went out into all the earth," which is all one. Many 
sentences are in the Bible, wherein JSt. Paul observed the 
translation of the Seventy Interpreters, for he contemned 
them not; and whereas he was preacher to the Greeks, 
therefore he was constrained to preach as they understood. 

In such sort did he use that sentence, 1 Cor. xv. : " Death 
is sw^allowed up in victory," whereas in the Hebrew, it is " in 
the end;" yet 'tis all one. St. Paul was very rich and flowing 
in w^ords; one of his words contains three of Cicero's orations, 
or the wdiole of Isaiah and Jeremiah. O! he was an excellent 
preacher; he is not in vain named vas electum. Our Lord 
God said: I will give a preacher to the world that shall be 
precious. There Avas never any that understood the Old 
Testament so well as St. Paul, except e/ohn the Baptist, and 
John the Divine. St. Peter excels also. St. JNiatthew and 
the rest well describe the histories, which are very necessary; 
but as to the things and words of the Old Testament, they 
never mention what is couched therein. 

St. Paul translated much out of Hebrew into Greek, which 
ttone besides were able to do; in handling one chapter, he 



OF ANTICHRIST. 193 

often expounds four, five, or six. Oh, he dearly loved Moses 
and Isaiah, for they, together with king David, were the 
chief prophets. Tlie words and things of St. Paul are taken 
out of Moses and the Prophets. 

Young divines ought to study Hebrew, to the end they 
may be able to compare Greek and Hebrew words together, 
and discern their properties, natures, and strength. 



OF ANTICHRIST. 

CCCCXXIX. 

Antichrist is the pope and the Turk together; a beast full 
of life must have a body and soul; the spirit or soul of anti- 
christ, is the pope, his flesh or body the Turk. The latter 
wastes and assails and persecutes God's church corporally; the 
former spiritually and corporally too, with hanging, burning, 
murdering, &c. But, as m the apostle's time, the church 
had the victory over the Jews and Romans, so now will 
she keep the field firm and solid against the hypocrisy and 
idolatry of the pope, and the tyranny and devastations of the 
Turk and her other enemies. 

ccccxxx. 

" And the king shall do according to his will, and he shall 
exalt himself, and magnify himself above every god, and shall 
speak marvellous things against the God of gods, and shall 
prosper until the indignation be accomplished: for that that 
is determined shall be done. Neither shall he regard the 
God of his fathers, nor the desire of women, nor regard any 
god, for he shall magnify himself above all." 

This prophecy, as all the teachers agree, points directly at 
the antichrist, under the name of Antiochus; for antichrist 
will regard neither God nor the love of women — that is, the 
state of matrimony. These two, antichrist contemns on 
earth — God, that is religion, and mankind. He will not re- 
gard women, that is, he will contemn temporal and house- 
government, laws, jurisdiction, emperors and kings: for 
through women children are born, and brought up. to the 

o 



194 Luther's table-talk. ' 

perpetuation of mankind and replenishing of the world; where 
women are not regarded, of necessity temporal and house 
government is also contemned, and laws, and ordinances, and 
rulers. 

Daniel was an exceeding high and excellent prophet, whom 
Christ loved, and touching whom he said: Whoso readeth, 
let him understand. He spoke of that antichrist persecutor 
as clearly as if he had been an eye-witness thereof. Read 
the 11th chapter throughout. It applies to the time when 
the emperor Caligula and other tyrants ruled; it distinctly 
says: " He shall plant the tabernacles of his palace be- 
tween the seas, in the glorious holy mountain;" that is, at 
Rome, in Italy. The Turk rules also between two seas, at 
Constantinople, but that is not the holy mountain. He does 
not honour or advance the worship of Maosim^ nor does he 
prohibit matrimony. Therefore Daniel points directly at the 
pope, who does both, with great fierceness. The prophet 
says further : " He shall also be forsaken of his king." It 
is come to that pass already, for we see kings and princes 
leave him. As to the forms of religion under the pope and 
Turk, there is no difference, but in a few ceremonies.; the 
Turk observes the Mosaical, the pope the Christian cere- 
monies — both sophisticate and falsify them; for, as the Turk 
corrupts the Mosaic bathings and washings, so the pope cor- 
rupts the sacrament of baptism and of the Lord's supper. 

The kingdom of antichrist is described also in the revela- 
tion of John, where it is said: " And it w^as given unto him 
to make war with the saints and to overcome them." This 
might seem prophesied of the Turk and not of the pope, 
but we must, on investigation, understand it of the pope's 
abominations and tyranny in temporal respects. It is further 
said in the Apocalypse: " It shall be for a time, and times, 
and half a time." Here is the question; what is a time ? If 
time be understood a year, the passage signifies three years 
and a half, and hits Antiochus, who for such a period perse- 
cuted the people of Israel, but at length died in his own filth 
and corruption. In like manner will the pope also be de- 
stroyed; for he began his kingdom, not through power ox 
the divine authority, but through superstition and a forced 
interpretation of some passages of Scripture. Popedom is 
built on a foundation which will bring about its fall. Daniel 



OF ANTICHRIST. 195 

prophesies thus . " And through his policy he shall cause 
craft to prosper in his hand; but he shall be broken without 
hand," This refers specially to the pope, for all other 
tyrants and monarchs fall by temporal power and strength. 
However, it may hit both pope and Turk. Both began to 
reign almost at one time, under the emperor Phocas, who 
murdered his own master, the emperor Maurice, Avith his 
empress and young princes, well nigh nine hundred years 
since. The pope begau to govern the church spiritually at the 
same time that Mohhamraed founded his power; the pope's 
temporal kingdom stood scarce three hundred years, for he 
plagued and harassed kings and emperors. I cannot well 
define or comprehend this prophecy : " A time, and times, 
and half a time." I do not know whether it refers to the 
Turk, who began to rule when Constantinople was taken, in 
the year 1453, eighty-five years ago. If I calculate a time 
to be the age of Christ (thirty years) this expression would 
mean one hundred and five years, and the Turk would still 
have twenty years swing to come. Well, God knows how 
it stands, and how he will deliver those that are his. Let us 
not vex ourselves with seeking over-knowledge. Let us 
repent and pray. 

Seeing the pope is antichrist,* I believe him to be a devil 
incarnate. Like as Christ is true and natural God and man, 
so is antichrist a living devil. It is true, too, what they say 
of the pope, that he is a terrestrial god, — for he is neither a 
real god nor a real man, but of the two natures mingled toge- 
ther. 

He names himself an earthly god, as though the only true 
and Almighty God were not God on earth ! Truly, the 
pope's kingdom is a horrible outrage against the power 
of God and against mankind ; an abomination of desola- 
tion, which stands in the holy place. 'Tis a monstrous 
blasphemy for a human creature to presume, now Christ is 
come, to exalt himself in the church above God. If it had 
been done amongst the Gentiles, before the coming of Christ, 
it would not have been so great a wonder. But though 
Daniel, Christ himself, and his apostles, Paul and Peter, have 

* The identity of antichrist with the pope had already been asserted by 
John Huss, in his De Anatomia Antichristi. 

o2 



J 96 Luther's table-talk. 

given us warning of that poisoned beast and pestilence, yet we 
Christians have been, and still are, so doltish and mad, as to 
adore and worship all his idols, and to believe that he is lord 
over the universal world, as heir to St. Peter; whereas neither 
Christ nor St. Peter left any succession upon earth. 

The pope is the last blaze in the lamp, which will go out, 
and ere long be extinguished, the last instrument of the 
devil, that thunders and lightens with sword and bull, 
making war through the power and strength of others, as 
Daniel says: " Re is powerful, but not by his own strength." 
It has been affirmed that the pope has more power in one 
finger, than all the princes in Germany; but the spirit of 
God's mouth has seized upon that shameless strumpet, and 
startled many hearts, so that they regard him no more; a thing 
no emperor, with sword and power, had been able to accom- 
plish ; the devil scorns these weapons: but when he is 
struck with God's Word, then the pope is turned to a poppy 
and a frothy flower. 

ccccxxxi. 

The word Papa, Pope, comes, as I think, of the word Abba, 
repeated twice, meaning father of fathers. Of old, the 
bishops were called Papa ; Jerome, writing to Augustin, who 
was bishop of Hippo, calls him Holy Pope : and in the legend 
of St. Cyprian, martyr, we read that the judge asked him: 
Art thou the Cyprian whom the Christians call their pope ? 
It seems to me to have been a term applied to all the bishops. 
Children call their fathers papa ; the bishops were the s^\- 
r\t\\2X papas of the people. 

Who, thirty years ago, would have dared to say of the 
pope what we now say of him? None then ventured to ex- 
press himself respecting him in other terms than those of 
veneration and supplication. 

CCCC XXXII. 

Whence comes it that the popes pretend 'tis they who form 
the church, when, all the while, they are bitter enemies of 
the church, and have no knowledge, certainly no comprehen- 
sion, of the holy gospel? Pope, cardinals, bishops, not a soul 
of them has read the Bible; 'tis a book unknown to them. 
They are a pack of guzzling, stuffing wretches, rich, wal- 
lowing in wealth and laziness, resting secure in their power, 



OF ANTICHRIST. 197 

and never, for a moment, thinking of accomplishing God's 
will. The Sadducees were infinitely more pious than the 
papists, from whose holiness God preserve us. May he pre- 
serve us, too, from security, which engenders ingratitude, 
contempt of God, blasphemy, and the persecution of divine 
things. 

CCCCXXXIII. 

Some one, speaking of the signs and marvels which are to 
herald the coming of antichrist, when he shall present him- 
self previous to the last judgment, said he w^as to be armed 
with a breath of fire, which would overthrow all who might 
seek to oppose him. Dr. Luther observed: These are pa- 
rables, but they agree in a measure with the prophecies of 
Daniel; for the throne of the pope is a throne of flame, and 
fire is his arm, as the scymetar is the Turk's. Antichrist at- 
tacks with fire, and shall be punished with fire. The villain 
is now full of fear, crouching behind his mountains, and sub- 
mitting to things against which heretofore he would have 
hurled his lightning and his thunder. 

CCCCXXXIV. 

On the 8th August, came a letter from Bucer, relating that 
the council of Vienne was over, that the cardinals had re- 
turned home, and that the gospel had been eagerly receivei^ 
at Piacenza and Bologna. The pope, enraged at this result, 
had sent for a German, named Corfentius, to whom he trans- 
mitted a safe conduct ; but, despite this, when Corfentius 
reached Rome, he was seized and thrown into the Tiber. Dr. 
Luther observed : Such is the good faith of the Italian 
papists ! Happy tlie man who puts no trust in them. If the 
men of God, who preacli the gospel in Italy, remain firm, 
there will be much bloodshed. See what snares are laid for 
us here in Germany ; there's not a single hour wherein we 
can regard ourselves as safe. Had not God watched over 
us, we must long since have succumbed. 

ccccxxxv. 

Some one asked how happened it St. James had been at 
Compostella. Dr. Martin replied : Just as it happens, that 
the papists reckon up sixteen apostles, while Jesus Christ had 
but twelve. In many places, the papists boast of having 



198 LUTHER S TABLE-TALK. 

some of ttie milk of the Virgin Mary, and of the hay in which 
Christ lay in the cradle. A Franciscan boasted he had some 
of this hay in a wallet he carried with him. A roguish fel- 
low took out the hay, and put some charcoal in its place. 
When the monk came to show the people his hay, he found 
only the wood. However, he was at no loss: " My brethren," 
said he, " I brought out the wrong wallet with me, and so 
cannot show you the hay; but here is some of the wood that 
St. Lawrence was grilled upon." 

ccccxxxvi. 
Kings and princes coin money only out of metals, but the 
pope coins money out of everything — indulgences, ceremo- 
nies, dispensations, pardons; 'tis all fish comes to his net. 
'Tis only baptism escapes him, for children came into the 
world without clothes to be stolen, or teeth to be drawn. 

CCCCXXXVII. 

In Italy, the monasteries are very wealthy. There are but 
three or four monks to each; the surplus of their revenues 
goes to the pope and his cardinals. 

CCCCXXXVIII. 

A gentleman being at the point of death, a monk from the 
next convent came to see w^hat he could pick up, and said to 
tlie gentleman: Sir, will you give so and so to our monastery? 
The dying man, unable to speak, replied by a nod of the 
head, whereupon the monk, turning to the gentleman's son, 
said: You see, your father makes us this bequest. The son 
said to the father: Sir, is it your pleasure that I kick this 
monk down stairs? The dying man nodded as before, and the 
son forthwith drove the monk out of doors. 

CCCCXXXIX. 

A professor at Wittenberg, named Vitus Ammerbach, 
having advanced the proposition that, some head or other 
being necessary for the church, the pope might as well be that 
head as another, Luther said: Greece was never under the 
authority of the pope, nor Judea, nor Scythia, yet in all these 
countries were Christians of great piety. 'Tis great pre- 
sumption in Ammerbach to propound these fallacies. 



OF ANTICHRIST. 199 

CCCCXL. 

Some one obser.ved: The papists flatter themselves our 
doctrines will not last long, but will come to nothing, like 
those of Arius, which, saj they, endured but for forty years 
Dr. Luther replied: The sect of Arius maintained itself for 
nearly sixty years; but as it was based on heretical princi- 
ples, it ended in confusion and destruction, whereas our op- 
ponents are compelled, despite themselves, to admit that we 
have right on our side. Our light so shines in the eyes of 
all men, that none can deny it. 

CCCCXLI. 

They once showed here, at Wittenberg, the drawers of St. 
Joseph and the breeches of St. Francis. The bishop of 
Mayence boasted he had a gleam of the flame of Moses' bush. 
At Compostella they exhibit the standard of the victory that 
Jesus Christ gained over death and the devil. The crown of 
thorns is shown in several places. 

CCCCXLII. 

When Wolsey, who w^as the son of a butcher, was made 
cardinal, a merry fellow said: " Please God he come to be 
pope, for then we shall have meat on fast days. St. Peter, 
because he w^as a fisherman, prohibited meat, in order to raise 
the price of fish; this butcher's son will do the same for fish." 

CCCCXLIII. 

The cuckoo takes the eggs out of the linnet's nest, and 
puts her own in their place. When the young cuckoos grow 
big, they eat the linnet. The cuckoo, too, has a great anti- 
pathy towards the nightingale. The pope is a cuckoo; he 
robs the church of her true eggs, and substitutes in their 
place his greedy cardinals, who devour the mother that has 
nourished them. The pope, too, cannot abide that nightin- 
gale, the preaching and singing of the true doctrine. 

CCCCXLIV. 

They show, at Rome, the head of St. John the Baptist, 
though 'tis well known that the Saracens opened his tomb, 
and burned his remains to ashes. These impostures of the 
papists cannot be too seriously reprehended. 



200 Luther's table-talk. 



CCCCXLV. 



The papists, for the most part, are mere gross blockheads. 
One of their priests I knew, baptized with this form of words: 
Ego te baptiste in nomine Christe. Another, in singing, 
used to say, elema, instead of clama, and when corrected, only 
bawled all the louder, elema, elema. Another said, elicere, 
instead of dicere. At Bamberg, thej exhibit, once a year, a 
book, which they say contains the history of the emperor 
Henry and his wife Cimegonde, who made, on their marriage- 
day, a vow of virginity. Birkheimer, when he passed through 
Bamberg, asked to see this book, and when it was brought 
to him, found it was only a copy of Cicero's Topics. In one 
convent, the brethren read inunsiinus, instead of sumpsimus. 
A young brother, just fresh from study, correcting this error, 
the rest said to him: "Mind thy own business; we have 
always read munsimus, and we are not going to change our 
reading for thee." 

CCCCXLVI. 

Two jesters held a disputation before the pope, -who was 
at dinner, the one maintaining, the other denying, the 
immortality of the soul. The pope said, that he who advo- 
cated the immortality of the soul adduced excellent reasons, 
but that, for his own part, he should side with the man who 
denied its immortality, seeing that it was a convenient doc- 
trine, holding out a very desirable prospect, and 'tis to such 
wretches as these the government of the church is to be 
confided. 

CCCCXLVII. 

Albert, bishop of Mayence, had a physician attached to 
his person, who, being a protestant, did not enjoy the pre- 
late's favour. The man seeing this, and being an avaricious, 
ambitious, world-seeker, denied his God, and turned back to 
popery, saying to his associates: Til put Jesus Christ by for 
awhile, till I've made my fortune, and then bring him out 
again. This horrible blasphemy met with its just reward; 
for next day the miserable hypocrite was found dead in hia 
bed, his tongue hanging from his mouth, his face as black as 
a coal, and his neck twisted half round. I was myself an 
ocular witness of this merited chastisement of impiety. 



OF ANTICHRIST. 201 

CCCCXLVIII. 

Philip Melancthon, on the authority of a person who had 
filled an important post at the court of Clement VII., men- 
tioned that every day, after the pope had dined or supped, 
his cup-bearer and cooks were imprisoned for two hours, and 
then, if no symptoms of poison manifested themselves in their 
master, were released. "What a miserable life" observed 
Luther; "'tis exactly what Moses has described in Deutero- 
nomy: ^And thy Hfe shall hang in doubt before thee, and 
thou shalt fear, day and night, and shall have none assurance 
of thy life. In the morning, thou shalt say: would God it 
were even! and at even, thou shalt say: would God it were 
morning!' " 

CCCCXLIX. 

Mary, the humble virgin of Nazareth, strikes these poten- 
tates and popes fiercely, when she sings: "I will put down 
the mighty from their seats." Doubtless she had a sweet 
and sounding voice. 

The pope and his crew are mere worshippers of idols, and 
servants of the devil, with all their doings and living; for he 
regards not at all God's Word, nay, condemns and persecutes 
it, and directs all his juggling to the drawing us away from 
the true faith in Christ. He pretends great holiness, under 
colour of the outward service of God, for he has instituted 
orders with hoods, with shavings, fasting, eating of fish, 
saying mass, and such like: but in the groundwork, 'tis 
altogether the doctrine of the devil; and the cause why the 
pope so stifily holds such devilish doctrine is, that which the 
gospel relates, Matt. iv. The devil has shown him the 
kingdoms of the world, and made promise to him as he did 
to Christ. This makes him contemn and scorn our sermons 
and God's service, by which we are beggars, and endure 
much, while for his doctrine he gets money and wealth, 
honour and power, and is so great a monarch, that he can 

bring emperors under his girdle. 

• 

CCCCL. 

I cannot imagine how there should be peace between us 
and the papists, for neither will yield to the other; 'tis an 
everlasting war, like that between the woman's seed and the 
old serpent. When temporal kings are weary of warring, 



202 LUTHER S TABLE-TALK. 

they make a truce, more or less enduring, but in our case, 
there can be no such cessations; for we cannot depart from 
the gospel, nor will they desist from their idolatry and 
blaspheming; the devil will not suffer his feet to be chopped 
off, nor will Christ have the preaching of his Word hindered; 
therefore I cannot see how any peace or truce may be 
between Christ and Belial. 

CCCCLI. 

After the persecution of the church ceased, the popes 
aimed at the government, out of covetousness and ambition. 
The first was Hildebrand, or rather Hell-brand; they af- 
frighted the people with their excommunication, which was 
so fearful a thing, that it descended upon the children, nay, 
fell upon servants. On the other hand, the pope seeking the 
goodwill of the people, granted and sold the remission of 
sins, were they never so heavy. Had one ravished the 
Virgin Mary, or crucified Christ anew, the pope would, for 
money, have pardoned him. This power and domination of 
the pope's, God has brought to confusion and destruction by 
my pen: for God, out of nothing, can make all things, and of 
the least means produce the greatest results. 

CCCCLII. 

Popedom must needs be brought to the stake, and pay for 
all. The pope shall be devoured by the friars, his creatures. 
The great and innumerable multitude of monks and friars, 
said cardinal Campeggio, produces great evil; for they shake 
that fair monarchy of popedom, so carefully erected; and he 
said right; the Rat King is being paid home by his rats. 
By divinity he cannot be defended, for 'tis no argument of 
his canonists and shaven crew, that his rule has long been a 
custom. How should the pope be able to judge, who has no 
skill or experience in matters of temporal government. How 
foolishly decides he touching matrimonial causes. He has 
forbidden his greased retinue to enter into the state of 
matrimony, though he commands it to be held and observed 
as a sacrament. If matrimony be a sacrament, it cannot be 
for the heathen; for the unbelieving Gentiles have nothing 
to do with them. 



OF ANTICHRIST. 203 

CCCCLIII. 

'Tis a mere fable to say that Constantine the Emperor 
gave to the pope so much property and people as he boasts 
of. This I read, that Constantine gave much alms to the 
poor, commanding tlie bishops to distribute them, by which 
means they grew to be great lords. But he gave them 
neither countries nor cities; wherefore the world wonders 
whence the popes derived such dominions. In former times 
the popes were not lords over emperors and kings, but 
were instituted or ordained by the emperors. 

CCCCLIV. 

The world remains the world it was thousands of years 
ago; that is, the spouse of the devil. The world says now, 
as the Pharisees said to their servants, whom they had sent 
to take Christ prisoner: " Are ye also deceived? have any of 
the rulers or Pharisees believed in him? This people that 
knoweth not the law are accursed." Even so says the world 
now: Do the great ones and bishops believe in the Lutheran 
doctrine? 

CCCCLV. 

The pope denies not the sacrament, but he has stolen from 
the laity the one part or kind thereof; neither does he teach 
the true use of it. The pope rejects not the Bible, but he 
persecutes and kills upright, good, and godly teachers, as the 
Jews persecuted and slew the prophets that truly expounded 
and taught the Scriptures. The pope will permit the sub- 
stance and essence of the sacrament and Bible to remain; but 
he will compel and force us to use them according to his will 
and pleasure, and will constrain us to believe the fictitious 
transubstantiation, and the real presence, corpora liter. The 
pope does nothing else than pervert and abuse all that God 
has ordained and commanded. 

CCCCLVI. 

The chief cause that I fell out with the pope was this: the 
pope boasted that he was the head of the church, and con- 
demned all that would not be under his power and authority; 
for he said, although Christ be the head of the church, yet, 
notwithstanding, there must be a corporal head of the church 
upon earth. With this I could have been content, had he 



204 Luther's table-talk. 

but taught the gospel pure and clear, and not introduced 
human inventions and lies in its stead. Further, he took 
upon him power, rule, and authority over the Christian 
church, and over the Holy Scriptures, the Word of God; no 
man must presume to expound the Scriptures, but only he, 
and according to his ridiculous conceits; so that he made him- 
self lord over the church, proclaiming her at the same time 
a powerful mother, and empress over the Scriptures, to which 
we must yield and be obedient; this was not to be endured. 
They wiio, against God's word, boast of the church's autho- 
rity, are mere idiots. The pope attributes more power to the 
church, which is begotten and born, than to the Word, which 
has begotten, conceived, and born the church. 

We, through God's grace, are not heretics, but schismatics, 
causing, indeed, separation and division, wherein -vve are not 
to blame, but our adversaries, who gave occasion thereto, 
because they remain not by God's word alone, which we 
have, hear, and follow. 

CCCCLVII. 

When our Lord God intends to plague and punish one, he 
leaves him in blindness, so that he regards not God's word, 
but condemns the same, as the papists now do. They know 
that our doctrine is God's word, but they will not allow of 
this syllogism and conclusion: When God speaks, we must 
hear him; now God speaks through the doctrine of the 
gospel; therefore we must hear him. But the papists, against 
their own consciences, say. No; we must hear the church. 

It is very strange: they admit both propositions, but will not 
allow of the consequences, or permit the conclusions to be 
right. They urge some decree or other of the Council of Con- 
stance, and say, though Christ speak, who is the truth itself, 
yet an ancient custom must be preferred, and observed for law. 
Thus do they answer, when they seek to wrest and pervert 
the truth. 

If this sin of antichrist be not a sin against the Holy 
Ghost, laen I do not know how to define and distinguish sins. 
They sin herein wilfully against the revealed truth of God's 
word, in a most stubborn and stiff- necked manner. I pray, 
who would not, in this case, resist these devilish and shame- 
less lying lips? I marvel not John Huss died so joyfully, 



OF ANTICHRIST. 205 

seeing he heard of such abominable impieties and wicked- 
nesses of the papists. I pray, how holds the pope concerning 
the church ? He preserves her, but only in an external lustre, 
pomp, and succession. But we judge her according to her 
essence, as she is in herself, in her own substance, that is, 
according to God's word and sacraments. The pope is 
reserved for God's judgment, therefore only by God's judg- 
ment he shall be destroyed. Henry VHL, king of Enghiiid; 
is now also an enemy to the pope's person, but not to liis 
essence and substance; he would only kill the body of the 
pope, but suffer his soul, that is, his false doctrine, to live; 
the pope can well endure such an enemy; he hopes within the 
space of twenty years to recover his rule and government 
again. But I fall upon the pope's soul, his doctrine, Avith 
God's word, not regarding his body, that is, his wicked per- 
son and life. I not only pluck out his feathers, as the king 
of England and prince George of Saxony do, but I set the 
knife to his throat, and cut his windpipe asunder. We put 
the goose on the spit; did we but pluck her, the feathers 
would soon grow again. Therefore is Satan so bitter an 
enemy unto us, because we cut the pope's throat, as does also 
the king of Denmark, who aims at the essence of popery. 

CCCCLVIII. 

'Tis wonderful how, in this our time, the majesty of the 
[•ope is fallen. Heretofore, all monarchs, emperors, kings, 
and princes feared the pope's power, who held them all at his 
nod; none durst so much as mutter a word against him. 
This great god is new fallen; his own creatures, the friars 
and monks, are his enemies, who, if they still continue with 
him, do so for the sake of g^^in; otherwise they would oppose 
him more fiercely than we do 

CCCCLIX. 

The pope's crown is named regnum mundi, the kingdom 
of the world. I have heard it credibly reported at Rome, 
that this crown is worth more than all the princedoms of Ger- 
many. God placed Popedom in Italy not without cause, for 
the Italians can make out many things to be real and true, 
which in truth are not so: they have crafty and subtle brains. 



206 Luther's table-talk. 

CCCCLX. 

If tlie pope were the head of the Christian church, then 
the church were a monster with two heads, seeing that vSt. 
Paul says that Christ is her head. The pope may w^ell be, 
and is, the head of the false church. 

CCCCLXI. 

Where the linnet *s, there is also the cuckoo, for he thinks 
liis song a thousand times better than the linnet's. Even 
thus, the pope places himself in the church, and so that his 
song may be heard, overcrows the church. The cuckoo is 
good for something, in that its appearance gives tidings that 
summer is at hand; so the pope serves to show us that the 
last day of judgment approaches. 

CCCCLXII. 

There are many that think I am too fierce against Pope- 
dom; on the contrary, I complain that I am, alas! too mild; 
I Avish I could breathe out lightning against pope and Pope- 
dom, and that every word were a thunderbolt. 

CCCCLXIII. 

Tis an idle dream the papists entertain of antichrist; they 
suppose he shoukl be a single person, that should govern, 
scatter money amongst them, do miracles, carry a fiery oven 
about liim, and kill the saints. 

CCCCLXIV. 

In Popedom they make priests, not to preach and teach 
God's AVord, but only to celebrate mass, and to gad about 
with the sacrament. For, when a bishop ordains a man, he 
says: Take unto thee power to celebrate mass, and to offer 
for the living and the dead. But we ordain priests according 
to tlie command of Christ and St. Paul, namely, to preach 
the pure gospel and God's AVord. The papists in their ordi- 
nations make no mention of preaching and teaching God's 
AVord, therefore their consecrating and ordaining is false and 
unright, for all worshipping whicli is not ordained of God, or 
erected by God's AVord and command, is nothing worth, yea, 
mere idolatry. 



OF ANTICHRIST. 907 

CCCCLXV. 

Next unto mj just cause the small repute and mean aspect 
of my person gave the blow to the pope. For when I began 
to preach and write, the pope scorned and contemned me; lie 
thought: 'Tis but one poor friar; what can he do against me? 
I have maintained and defended this doctrine in Popedom, 
against many emperors, kings, and princes, what then shall 
this one man do? If he had condescended to regard me, he 
might easily have suppressed me in the beginning. 

CCCCLXVI. 

A German, making his confession to a priest at Rome, 
promised, on oath, to keep secret whatsoever the priest should 
impart unto him, until he reached home; whereupon the 
priest gave him a leg of the ass on which Christ rode into 
Jerusalem, very neatly bound up in silk, and said: This is 
the holy relic on which the Lord Christ corporally did sit, 
with his sacred legs touching this ass's leg. Then was the 
German wondrous glad, and carried the said holy relic 
with him into Germany. When he got to the borders, he 
bragged of his holy relic in the presence of four others, his 
comrades, when, lo! it turned out that each of them had like- 
wise received from the same priest a leg, after promising the 
same secrecy. ThereujDon, all exclaimed, with great wonder: 
Lord! had that ass five legs? 

CCCCLXVII. 

A picture being brought to Luther, in which the pope, 
with Judas the traitor, were represented hanging on the 
purse and keys, he said : 'Twill vex the pope horribly, that 
he, whom emperors and kings have w^orshipped, should now 
be figured hanging on his false pick-looks. It will also 
grieve the papists, for their consciences will be touched. The 
purse accords well with the cardinal's hats and their incomes, 
for the pope's covetousness has been so gross, that in all 
kingdoms he has not only raked to himself Annates, Pallium- 
money, &c., but has also sold for money the holy sacrament, 
indulgences, fraternities, Christ's blood, matrimony, &c. 
Therefore his purse is filled with robberies, upon which justly 
ought to be exclaimed, as in the Revelations; "Recompense 
them as they have done to you, and make it double unto 



208 Luther's table-talk. 

them, according to their works." Therefore, seeing the pope 
has damned me and given me over to the devil, so will I» in 
requital, hang him on his own keys. 

CCCCLXVIII. 

It is abominable that in so many of the pope's decrees, 
there is not one single sentence of Holy Scripture, or one 
article of the Catechism mentioned. The pope intending to 
conduct the government of his church in an external way, 
his teachings were blasphemous; such as that a stinking 
friar's hood, put upon a dead body, procured remission of 
sins, and was of equal value -with the merits of our blessed 
Saviour Christ Jesus. 

CCCCLXIX. 

It is no marvel that the papists hate me so vehemently, for 
I have well deserved it at their hands. Christ more mildly 
reproved the Jews than I the papists, yet they killed him. 
These, therefore, think they justly persecute me, but, accord- 
ing to God's laws and will, they shall find their mistake. 
In the day of the last judgment I will denounce the pope and 
his tyrants, who scorn and assail the Word of God, and his 
sacraments. The pope destroys poor married priests, that 
receive and observe God's Word and statutes, whereas by all 
their laws they are only to be displaced from their office. So 
Prince George has banished and driven away from Oschitz 
ten citizens and householders, with twenty-seven children, 
martyrs to the Word. Their sighs will rise up to heaven 
against him. 

CCCCLXX. 

The pope and his crew can in nowise endure the idea of 
reformation; the mere word creates more alarm at Rome, 
than thunderbolts from heaven, or the day of judgment. A 
cardinal said, the other day: Let them eat, and drink, and do 
what they will; but as to reforming us, we think that is a vain 
idea; w*e will not endure it. Neither will we protestants be 
satisfied, though they administer the sacrament in both kinds, 
and permit priests to marry; we will also have the doctrine 
of the faith pure and unfalsified, and the righteousness that 
justifies and saves before God, and which expels and drives 



OF ANTICHRIST. 2(>9 

away all idolatry an(J false-worshipping; these gone and 
banished, the foundation on which Popedom is built falls 
also. 

CCCCLXXI. 

We will have the holy sacrament administered in both 
kinds, that it shall be free for priests t* marry, or to forbear, 
and we will in no way suffer ourselves to be bereaved of the 
article of justification: " That by faith only iii Jesus Christ 
we are justified and saved before God; without any works, 
merits and deserts, merely by grace and mercy." This we 
must keep and preserve, pure and unfulsified, if we intend to 
be saved. As to private mass, we cannot hinder it, but must 
leave it to God, to be acted by those over whom we have 
neither power nor command; yet, nevertheless, we will openly 
teach and preach against it, and show that it is abominable 
blasphemy and idolatry. Either we must go together by the 
ears, or else they, in our countries, must yield unto us in this 
particular; if it come to pass that herein they yield unto us, 
then must we be contented; for, like as the Christians dealt 
with the Arians, and as St. Paul was constrained to carry 
himself towards the Jews, even so must we also leave the 
papists to their own consciences, and seeing they will not 
follow us, so we neither can nor will force them, but must let 
them go and commit it to God's judgment; and truly, sin- 
cerely, and diligently hold unto and maintain our doctrine, 
let the same vex, anger, and displease whom it will. 

CCCCLXXII. 

The papists see they have an ill cause, and, therefore, 
labour to maintain it with very poor arguments, that cannot 
endure the proof, and may be easily confuted. 

They say: "The praising of anything is an invocation; 
the saints are to be praised, therefore they are to be invoked." 
I answer: No, in nowise; for every praising is not invoking: 
married people are to be praised, but not to be invoked; for 
invocation belongs only to God, and not to any creature, 
either in heaven or on earth; no, not to any angel. They say: 

" The doctrine of the remission of sins is necessary: indul- 
gences, pardons, and graces are remissions of sins; therefore 
they are necessary." No: the pope's pardons are not remis- 

p 



210 LUTHER'S TABLE-TALK. 

sions of sins, but satisfactions for remitting the punishments: 
mere fables and fictions. 

CCCCLXXIII. 

When I was in Rome, a disputation was openly held, at 
which were present thirty learned doctors besides myself, 
against the pope's power; he boasting, that with his right 
hand he commands the angels in heaven, and with his left 
draws souls out of purgatory, and that his person is mingled 
with the godhead. Calixtus disputed against these assertions, 
and showed that it was only on earth that powder was given 
to the pope to bind and to loose. The other doctors here- 
upon assailed him wdth exceeding vehemence, and Calixtus 
discontinued his arguments, saying, he had only spoken by 
way of disputation, and that his real opinions w^ere far other- 
wise. 

CCCCLXXIV. 

For the space of many hundred years there has not been 
a single bishop that has shown any zeal on the subject of 
schools, baptism, and preaching; 'twould have been too great 
trouble for them, such enemies were they to God. I have 
heard divers worthy doctors affirm, that the church has long 
since stood in need of reformation; but no man was so bold 
as to assail Popedom; for the pope had on his banner. Noli 
me tangere; therefore every man w^as silent. Dr. Staupitz 
said once to me: "If you meddle with Popedom, you will 
have the whole world against you;" and he added — "yet the 
church is built on blood, and with blood must be sprinkled." 

CCCCLXXV. 

T would have all those who intend to preach the gospel, 
diligently read the popish abominations, their decrees and 
books; and, above all things, thoroughly consider the horrors 
of the mass — on account of which idol God might justly have 
drowned and destroyed the whole world — to the end their 
consciences may be armed and confirmed against their ad- 
versaries. 

CCCCLXXVI. 

That Italian monk's book, the Conformities^ wherein a com- 
parison is drawn between Christ and St. Francis, is a tissue 
of such horrible lies, that he who wrote it must have been 



OF ANTICHRIST. 211 

possessed of a devil, not only spiritually but corporally. 
Christ, he says, is a figure or emblem of St. Francis; and he 
affirms that Christ gave to St. Francis the power of saving 
or condemning whom he pleased. 

CCCCLXXVII. 

In a monastery at Luneburg, there stands to this day a 
great altar, whereon are represented the lite and miracles of 
Christ; his birth, his entry into Jerusalem, his passion, death, 
descent into hell, resurrection, and ascension. Just by is set 
forth, in like manner, the birth of St. Francis, his miracles, 
sufferings, death, and ascent into heaven, so that they esteemed 
the works of St. Francis of equal value with those of our 
blessed Saviour Christ Jesus; a great and abominable blas- 
phemy. 

CCCCLXXVIII. 

The pope's decretals are naught; he that drew them up 
was an ass. They are a book put together like a beggar's 
coat, patched up with all sorts of rags. There is nothing in 
them about the church; they all aim at temporal matters. 
Yet the pope says, these decretals are to have equal authority 
with the gospel and the writings of the apostles. 

CCCCLXXIX. 

In the pope's decretals are many horrible and diabolical 
canons; they are a great plague and evil lor the church. The 
shameless pope presumes to say : " Whoso believes and 
observes not my decrees, it were in vain for him to believe 
in Christ, or give credit to the four Evangelists." Is not 
this the language of the very devil, infusing deadly poison 
into the church? Again, he says in one of his decretals.- 
That though he led people into hell, they ought to follow him; 
whereas, on the contrary, the office of a true bishop is to 
comfort the broken and sorrowful in heart, and to lead them 
to Christ. Fie upon this reprobate villain! must he teach 
consciences to despair in this sort? Whoever reads the de- 
cretals, will often find fair sentences of Scripture monstrously 
lugged in as confirmation; and, in other cases, when the 
Scripture is dead against them, that it is roundly said: the 
Romish church has otherwise decided. Thus, like an in- 
fernal dog, the pope dares to subject God's Word to human 

p 2 



212 Luther's table-talk. 

creatures. 'Tis just the same with Thomas Aquinas, who, 
in his books, argues, pro et contra^ and when he cites a 
passage in Scripture, he goes on: Aristotle maintains the 
contrary: so that the Holy Scripture must give place to 
Aristotle, a heathen. The world heeds not this abominable 
darkness, but contemns the truth, and falls into horrible 
errors. Therefore, let us make good use of our time, for 
things will not always remain as now. 

CCCCLXXX. 

In the decretals, the pope domineers and triumphs like a 
victor; there he is on his dunghill, in possession, thundering 
and lightening with these words: " We have cognizance and 
authority, and by divine command we judge; all others ought 
to be obedient unto us." No human creature may criticise 
the pope; he only and alone has power to judge and criticise 
the whole universal world. I am persuaded, that in the 
pope's spiritual laws it is written above one thousand times, 
that the pope's actions may not be criticised by any man 
whatsoever. 

CCCCLXXXL 

The spiritual law of the pope is a filthy book, stinking of 
money. Take out of it covetousness and ambition, there 
remains nothing of its own proper substance, yet it has a great 
lustre, for all unhappiness must begin in nomine Domini. Like 
as all righteousness and saving health is only " in the name of 
the Lord," so, under the colour and cover of God's name, all 
idolatry and superstition come. Therefore the commandment 
fitly says: "Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy 
God in vain." 

CCCCLXXXII. 

Gratian, the lawyer, who collected the decretals together, 
endeavoured with diligence to arrange them congruously, and 
to separate the good from the evil. The good man meant 
well, but the result was naught; for he proceeded thus; he 
rejected that which was good, to justifiy that which was evil, 
and thus undertaking the impossible, became amazed and 
affrighted. 

CCCCLXXXIII. 

The fasting of the friars is more easy to them than our 
eating to us. For one day of fasting there are three of feast- 



OF ANTICHRIST. 213 

ing. Every friar for his supper has two quarts of beer, a 
quart of wine, and spice-cakes, or bread prepared with spiee 
and salt, the better to relish their drink. Thus go on these 
poor fasting brethren; getting^ so pale and wan, they are like 
the fiery angels. 

CCCCLXXXIV. 

If the emperor would merit immortal praise, he would 
utterly root out the order of the Capuchins, and, for an ever- 
lasting remembrance of their abominations, cause their books 
to remain in safe custody. 'Tis the Avorst and most poisonous 
sect. The Augustin and Bernardine friars are no way com- 
parable with these confounded lice. 

CCCCLXXXV. 

Francis was an Italian, born in the city of Assisi, doubtless 
an honest and just man. He little thought that such super- 
stition and unbelief would proceed out of his life. There 
have been so many of those grey friars, that they offered to 
send forty thousand of their number against the Turks, and 
yet leave their monasteries sufficiently provided for. 

The Franciscan and grey friars came up under the em- 
peror Frederick II., at the time St. Elizabeth was canonized, 
in the year 1207. Francis worked his game eighteen years; 
two years under the emperor Philip, four years under the 
emperor Otho, and twelve years under the emperor Frederick 
11. They feign, that after his death he appeared to the pope 
in a dream, held a cup in his hand, and filled the same with 
blood that ran out of his side. Is not this, think ye, a fine 
and proper piece of government, that began with dreams and 
with lies? The pope is not God's image, but his ape. He 
will be both God and emperor; as pope Innocent III. said: 
I will either take the crown from the emperor Philip, or he 
shall take mine from me. Oh, such histories ought diligently 
to be written, to the end posterity may know upon what 
grounds Popedom was erected and founded; namely, upon 
mere lies and fables. If I were younger, I would write a 
chronicle of the popes. 

CCCCLXXXVI. 

If the pope snould seek to suppress the mendicant friars, 
he would find fine sport; he has made them fat, and cherished 
them in his bosom, and assigned them the greatest and most 



214 Luther's table-talk. 

powerful princes for protectors. If lie should attempt to 
abolish them, thej would all combine and instigate the princes 
against him, for many kings and princes, and the emperor 
himself, have friars for confessors. The friars were the pope's 
columns, they carried him as the rats carry their king; I 
was our Lord God's quicksilver, which he threw into the fish- 
pond; that is, which he cast among the friars. 

A friar is evil every way, whether in the monastery or out 
of it. For as Aristotle gives an example touching fire, that 
burns whether it be in Ethiopia or in Germany, even so is it 
likewise with the friars. Nature is not changed by any cir- 
cumstances of time or place. 

CCCCLXXXVII. 

In Italy was a particular order of friars, called Fratres 
Ignorantice^ that is, Brethren of Ignorance, who took a solemn 
oath, that they would neither know, learn, nor understand any- 
thing at all, but answer all questions with Nescio. Truly, 
all friars are well worthy of this title, for they only read 
and babble out the words, but regard not their meaning. 
The pope and cardinals think: should these brethren study 
and be learned, they would master us. Therefore, saccum 
per neccum, that is, hang a bag about their necks, and send 
them a-begging through cities, towns, and countries. 

CCCCLXXXVIII. 

An honest matron here in Wittenberg, widow of the 
consul Horndorff, complained of the covetousness of the 
Capuchins, one of whom pressed her father, upon his death- 
bed, to bequeath something to their monastery, and got from 
him four hundred florins, for the use of the monastery, the friar 
constraining herself to make a vow, that she would mention 
the matter to no person. The man kept the money, which 
course he usually took, to the great hurt of all the children 
and orphans in that city. At last, by command of the 
magistrate, she told how the friar had acted. Many such 
xamples have been, yet no creature dared complain. There 
was no end of the robbing, filching, and stealing, of those 
insatiable, money -diseased w^retches. 

CCCCLXXXIX. 

When I was in the monastery at Erfurt, a preaching friar 
and a bare-foot friar wandered together into the country to 



OF ANTICHRIST. 215 

beg for the brethren, and to gather alms. These two played 
upon each other in their sermons. The bare-foot friar preach- 
ing first, said: "Loving country people, and good friends! 
take heed of that bird the swallow, for it is white within, but 
upon the back it is black; it is an evil bird, always chirping, 
but profitable for nothing; and when angered, is altogether 
mad," hereby describing the preaching friars, who wear 
on the outside black coats, and inside white linen. Now, 
in the afternoon, the preaching friar came into the pulpit, 
and played upon the bare-foot friar: Indeed, loving friends, 
I neither may nor can well defend the swallow; but the 
grey sparrow is far a worse and more hurtful bird than 
the swallow; for it bites the kine, and when it fouls into 
people's eyes, makes them blind, as ye may see in the book of 
'I'obit. He robs, steals, and devours all he can get, as oats, 
barley, wheat, rye, apples, pears, peas, cherries, &c. More- 
over, he is a lascivious bird: his greatest art is to cry: " Scrip, 
scrip," &c. The bare-foot friar might in better colours have 
painted the preaching friars, for they are proud buzzards and 
right epicureans; while the bare-foot friars, under colour of 
sanctity and humility, are more proud and haughty than 
kings or princes, and, most of all, have imagined and devised 
monstrous lies. 

ccccxc. 
St. Bernard was the best monk that ever was, whom I 
love beyond all the rest put together; yet he dared to say, it 
were a sign of damnation if a man quitted his monastery. 
He had under him three thousand monks, not one of w^hom 
was damned, if his opinion be true, sed vix credo. St. Ber- 
nard lived in dangerous times, under the emperors Henry IV. 
and v., Conrad, and Lothaire. He was a learned and able 
monk, but he gave evil example. The friars, especially the 
Minorites and Franciscans, had easy days by their hypocrisy; 
they touched no money, yet they were vastly rich, and lived 
in luxury. The evil friars' life began betimes, when people, 
under colour of piety, abandoned temporal matters. The 
vocation and condition of a true Christian, such as God 
ordained and founded it, consists in three hierarchies — 
domestic, temporal, and church government. 

ccccxci. 
The state of celibacy is great hypocrisy and wickedneas. 



216 Luther's table-talk. 

Augustin, though he lived in a good and acceptable time, was 
deceived through the exaltation of nuns. And although he 
gave them leave to marry, yet he said they did wrong to 
marry, and sinned against God. Afterwards, when the time 
of wrath and blindness came, and the truth was hunted away, 
and lying got the upper hand, the generation of poor women 
was contemned, under the colour of great holiness, but which, 
in truth, was mere hypocrisy. Christ with one sentence con- 
futes all their arguments: God created them male and female. 

CCCCXCII. 

The covetousness of the popes has exceeded all others, for 
the devil made choice of Rome as his peculiar habitation. 
The ancients said: Rome is a den of covetousness, a root of 
all wickedness. I have also read in a very old book, this 
verse following: — 

"Versus Amor, muudi caput est, et bestia terrae." 

That is, w^ien the word Amor is turned and read backward, 
Roma, Rome, the head of the world, a beast that devours 
all lands. At Rome, all is raked to their hands without 
preaching or church service, by superstition, idolatry, and 
selling their good works to the poor ignorant laity for money. 
St. Peter describes such covetousness with express and clear 
words, when he says: '* They have a heart exercised with 
covetous practices " I am persuaded a man cannot know the 
disease of covetousness, unless he know Rome; for the de- 
ceits and jugglings in other parts are nothing in comparison 
with those at Rome. 

CCCCXCIII. 

The proverb says: Priests' livings are catching livings; 
priests' goods never prosper; and this we know to be true by 
experience, for such as have taken spiritual livings unto them 
are grown poor thereby and become beggars. 

ccccxciv. 
A reformation being lately made at TVurtzburg among the 
prebends, they were constrained to put away their woman- 
cooks; this continued for a fortnight, when, as they could be 
without them no longer, they had leave to take them again. 
But the cooks refused to live with the prebends, unless they 
would take them as their wives, whereupon they received 
them on that condition, and were fain to apparel them anew, 



OF ANTICHRIST. 217 

to the end tliey might not be known. I have heard a lock- 
smith say, that for the space of a fortnight, day and night, he 
had work enough to do in making keys; for every one of 
those women would have a key to her prebend's chamber. 

Such wicked wa-etches must the church have to be her 
rulers and governors. In the council of Basle it was decreed, 
that priests should wear long gowns down to the feet, high 
shoes, broad hats, and neither red nor green apparel, and that 
no man should dispute whether the soul was mortal or im- 
mortal. The pope is a king without God and matrimony, 
for he has abolished that which is divine and godly, and 
altered that which God instituted and ordained in the world. 

ccccxcv. 

Saint Augustin and others distinguisn thus between here- 
tics, schismatics, and bad Christians: A schismatic is one 
that raises divisions and dissensions, professing the true faith 
of the Christian church, but not at union with her as to cer- 
tain ceremonies and customs; an evil Christian is he that 
agrees with the church both in doctrine of faith and ceremo- 
nies, but therewithal leads an evil life, and is of wicked con- 
versation. But an heretic is one that introduces false opinions 
and doctrines against the articles of the Christian faith, con- 
trary to the true meaning of Holy Scripture, and stubbornly 
maintains and defends them. The papists do not call me a 
heretic, but a schismatic; one that prepares discords and 
strifes. But I say, the pope is an arch heretic, for he is an 
adversary to my blessed Saviour Christ; and so am I to the 
pope, because he makes new laws and ordinances according 
to his own will and pleasure, and so directly aenies the ever- 
lasting priesthood of Christ. 

Let us but mark the two points in his decrees, where, with 
exceeding pompous majesty, he exalts himself above the Holy 
Scriptures. He is content to leave the expounding thereof 
to the Fathers, but the decision of their truth he reserves for 
the chair of Rome. Therefore he discharges against me his 
lighteuings and thunderings, yea, also against his own de- 
crees; for the pope himself says: Justice must give place 
and yield to the truth. For that purpose he produces the 
example of king Hezekiah, who brake in pieces the brazen 
serpent, w^hich God had commanded to be erected. But the 
pope deals quite contrary to his own laws and decrees; for 



21^ Luther's table-talk. 

now he will have that truth must and shall give place to his 
innumerable and apparent errors. And indeed it is a grievous 
case, that youth have not seen such errors, or comprehended 
them; they think that the gospel has always been the same 
as now it is. If we had held God's Word in due honour and 
reverence, then such abominable errors and idolatries would 
never have risen or crept in among us. 

CCCCXCVI. 

Through concord small things and wealth increase, as the 
heathen said; but dis^sension is dangerous and hurtful, espe- 
cially in schools, professions, high arts, and their professors, 
wherein the one ought to reach the hand to the other, kissing 
and embracing. But when we bite one another, then let us 
take heed lest we be swallowed up together. Therefore let 
us pray and strive; for the word of faith, and the prayers of 
the just, are the most powerful weapons ; moreover, God him- 
self sends his holy angels around them that fear him. We 
ought valiantly to fight, for we-are under a Lord of hosts, and 
a prince of war; therefore with one hand we must build, and 
in the other hand take the sword — that is, we must both teach 
and resist. 

It is now time to watch, for we are the mark they shoot 
at; our adversaries intend to make a confederacy with the 
Turk; they aim at us, but we must venture it, for antichrist 
will war and get the victory against the saints of God. We 
stand outwardly in the greatest danger, by reason of treachery 
and treason; the papists endeavour with money to corrupt 
our captains and oflicers. An ass laden with money may do 
anything, as Tacitus writes of us Germans; they have been 
taught to take money; there is neither fidelity nor truth on 
earth. 

CCCCXCVII. 

The papists have a fair and glittering external worship; 
they boast much of God's Word, of faith, of Christ, of the 
sacraments, of love, of hope, &c.^ but they utterly deny the 
power and virtue of all these; nay, teach that which is quite 
contrary thereunto. Therefore St. Paul very well says: 
" They deny the power of godliness." He does not say they 
deny godliness, but they deny the' power, strength, and virtue 
thereof, by false and superstitious doctrine. 



OF ANTICHRIST. 219 

CCCCXCVIII. 

Luther, coming from Rome, showed the prince elector of 
Saxony a picture he had brought witli him, whereon was 
painted how the pope had fooled the whole world with his 
superstitions and idolatries. There was the little ship of the 
church, as they term it, almost filled with friars, monks, and 
priests, casting lines out of the ship to those that were in the 
sea; the pope, with the cardinals and bishops, sat behind, in 
the end ol' the ship, overshadowed and covered by the Holy 
Ghost, who was looking up towards heaven, and through 
whom those swimming in the sea, in great danger of their 
lives, were hoisted up into the ship and saved. 

These and like fooleries we then believed as articles of 
faith. The papists blind people by pretending that they go 
through much tribulation in this world; whereas they wallow 
in all the glory, pleasures, and delights of the earth. But 
let them be assured, that ere many years the power of their 
abominable blasphemies, idolatries, and damnable religion, 
will be broken, if not destroyed. 

And on the contrary, we, who for the sake of confessing 
God's holy Word in truth, are terrified, banished, imprisoned, 
and slain here on earth by that man of sin, and God's enemy, 
the antichrist-pope of Rome, at the last day, with unspeak- 
able comfort, shall take possession of the fruits of our assured 
hopes — namely, everlasting consolation, joy, and salvation. 

ccccxcix. 
The pope places his cardinals in all kingdoms — peevish 
milk-sops, effeminate and unlearned blockheads, who lie loll- 
ing in king's courts, among the ladies and women. The pope 
has invaded all countries with these and his bi>hops. Ger- 
many is taken captive by popish bishops, for I can count 
above forty bishoprics, besides abbeys and cathedrals, which 
are richer than the bishoprics. Now, there are in Germany 
but eight and twenty principalities, so that the popish bishops 
are far more rich and powerful than the princes of the em- 
pire. 

D. 

The devil begat darkness; darkness begat ignorance; igno- 
rance begat error and his brethren; error begat free-will 
and presumption; free-will begat merit; merit begat forget 



220 Luther's table-talk. 

fulness of God; forgetfulness begat transgression; transgres- 
sion begat superstition; superstition begat satisfaction; satis- 
faction begat the mass-offering; the mass-offering begat the 
priest; the priest begat unbelief; unbelief begat king hypo- 
crisy; hypocrisy begat traffic in offerings for gain; traffic in 
offerings for gain begat purgatory; purgatory begat the 
annual solemn vigils; the annual vigils begat church-livings, 
church-livings begat avarice; avarice begat swelling super- 
fluity; swelling superfluity begat fulness; fulness begat rage; 
rage begat licence; licence begat empire and domination; 
domination begat pomp; pomp begat ambition; ambition be- 
gat simony; simony begat the pope and his brethren, about 
the time of the Babylonish captivity. 

After the Babylonish captivity, the pope begat the mystery 
of iniquity; the mystery of iniquity begat sophistical theology; 
sophistical theology begat rejecting of the Holy Scripture; 
rejecting of the Holy Scripture begat tyranny; tyranny begat 
slaughtering of the saints; slaughtering of the saints begat 
contemning of God; contemning of God begat dispensation; 
dispensation begat wilful sin; wilful sin begat abomination; 
abomination begat desolation; desolation begat doubt; doubt 
begat searching out the grounds of truth, and out of this, the 
desolator, pope, or antichrist, is revealed. 

St. Paul complained and said: " The time will come when 
they will not endure sound doctrine;" and elsewhere: "This 
know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come: for 
men shall be lovers of themselves," &c. 

When first I read these sentences, I did not look towards 
Rome, but thought they had been spoken of the Jews and 
Turks. 

DI. 

In the Old Testament, the year Jubilee was observed every 
fiftieth year; the pope imitated this with the golden gate; 
which brought gain and money to the popes; so they after- 
wards changed the fiftieth year into the five and twentieth, 
then to the fifteenth, and then to the seventh year, so they 
might frequently get money. 

DII. 

If I had not been a doctor, Satan had made me work 
enough to do. It was no slight and easy matter for one to 



OF ANTICHRIST. 22J 

alter the whole religion of Popedom, so deeply rooted. But I 
promised and swore in baptism, that I would hold by Christ and 
his word, that I would steadfastly believe in him, and utterly 
renounce the devil and all his lies. And, indeed, the oath 1 
took in baptism is renewed in all my tribulations; without 
this I could not have subsisted or resisted my troubles, but 
they had overwhelmed and made an end of me. I would wil- 
lingly have shown obedience to the pope and bishops in any 
reasonable particular; but they would have, short and round, 
that I should deny Christ, and make God a liar, and say: the 
gospel is heresy. 

Dili. 

In the New Testament, and in the Christian church, God's 
worship consists in the plain simple truth; no superstitions or 
worshipping of idols are there to be found; hence St. John, 
in his Epistle, writes: There are three that bear witness in 
earth: 1. The spirit; that is, the function of preaching. 
2. Water; that is, baptism. 3. Blood; that is, the supper of 
the Lord. But the pope and his seducing spirits contemn these 
witnesses, and have invented innumerable worshippings, cere- 
monies, and offerings; and instituted them of their own 
election, without God's Words, so that through errors the 
church is excluded from her bridegroom's ordinances. 

DIV. 

Ceremonies are only middle things, instituted for the end of 
policy; namely to observe rules, and that everything in the 
church may proceed decently and in order, as the law of 
nature also teaches, and as we behold in the creating of all 
creatures. 

DV. 

It is of the devil himself that the papists hold the final cause 
of instituting human traditions to be, that thereby God is 
truly worshipped and served, and that, therefore, they are 
necessary to salvation. 'Tis most monstrous; for though such 
human traditions were the best and most esteemed works of 
Christianity, which they are not, yet to say they are necessary 
to salvation, or give God satisfaction for our sins, and so pur- 
chase grace, spoils all, and makes the best of works to be 
utterly rejected of God. 



222 Luther's table-talk. 

The like superstition and abomination lay in those works 
which they call opera supererogationis^ that is, works which 
they had in overplus, and more than they, the friars, priests, 
and nuns themselves had need of, so sold them to the laity. 

DVI. 

If we could but preserve the catechism, set up schools 

for posterity, we had lived well; as for ceremonies, they might 
go whither they would, for they are the touch-powder, giving 
occasion to superstition; people thinking they are necessary 
to salvation and that their being omitted is sin. 

DVII. 

The popish fasting is right murder, whereby many people 
have been destroyed, observing the fasts strictly, and, chiefly, 
by eating one sort of food, so that nature's strength thereby 
is wholly weakened. 

For this cause Gerson was constrained at Paris to write a 
book of " Comfort for troubled and perplexed Consciences," 
to the end they might neither be discouraged nor despair. 
For those that fast, spoil themselves and weaken their 
strength. Such darkness has been in Popedom, where they 
neither taught, nor intended to teach, the ten commandments, 
the creed, and the Lord's prayer. 

DVin. 
There are two sorts of holiness, substantial and accidental; 
St. Francis was once substantially holy by his faith in Jesus 
Christ, but afterwards he became infatuated with the 
accidental holiness of the hood, an accessory wholly foreign to 
holiness. Ah, God! 'tis not the putting on this or that article 
of dress, that will give us a pass to heaven ! 

DIX. 

Luther received tidings from Denmark, that the king 
and the duke of Holstein had ordered a fast, to be observed 
three days, — as an admonition to the people to prayer and 
peace; whereupon he said: it is a very upright and good 
course; I wish all other kings and princes did the like; \U 
the most external humiliation, and when we add thereunt(j 
the inward humility of the heart, 'tis exceeding good 



OF ANTICHRIST. 223 

DX. 

Popedom stands upon the mass two manner of ways; first, 
spiritually, holding tliat the mass is a worshipping of God; 
secondly, corporally, being maintained and preserved, not by 
divine power, but by human and temporal princes. 

The mass is the papist's rock, both spiritually and carnally; 
and now it is fallen in the spirit, and in due time God will 
also destroy it in the flesh. 

DXI. 

The private mass, since the time of Gregory, now above 
eight hundred years, has deceived many saints. John Huss 
was taken captive by that deceitful painted stuff. I much 
wonder how God drew me out of this idolatry. Three 
years since there was here a man who certified me that in 
Asia no private mass was celebrated. I am assured that in 
Armenia, Ethiopia, India, and in the countries towards the 
east, there are many Christians to this day, who never heard 
mass. 

The mass in France was not so highly esteemed as it has 
been in Germany; for when in the morning one had heard 
mass, he cared for no more, how many soever were held, but 
passed by them without showing any particular regard. When 
the French king heard mass, he always gave a French crown 
to the priest, which he laid upon a book that was brought 
and held before him. 

DXII. 

The canon of the mass is pieced and patched up out of 
many lies. The Greeks have it not. When I was in Italy, 
I saw that they at Milan had no such canon, and when I 
offered to celebrate mass there, they said to me : JVos sunnis 
Amhroaiani. They told me that in former time they had 
been at debate among themselves, whether they should re- 
ceive into their church the book of Ambrose, or that of Gre- 
gory, and to that end prayed God by some miracle to decide 
for them. At night, they laid both the books in the church; 
in the morning, they found the book of Ambrose altogether 
whole and unmoved, upon the high altar, but the book of 
Gregory was torn all in pieces, scattered up and down the 
church. The same they construed thus: Ambrose shojld 



224 

remain at Milan upon the alter, Gregory be scattered through 
the whole world. 

DXIII. 

The ornaments and gay apparel used in Popedom, in cele- 
brating mass, and other ceremonies^ were partly taken out 
from Moses, and partly from the heathen. For as the priests 
saw that the public shows and plays, held in the market places, 
drew away the people, who took delight therein, they were 
moved to institute shows and plays in the churches, so as to 
draw children and unlearned people to church. Such are the 
toys they exhibit on Easter-eve, very pleasing and acceptable, 
not for devotion's sake, but to delight the foolish fancy. 

DXIV. 

When I was a young friar at Erfurt, and had to go out into 
the villages for puddings and cheeses, I once came to a little 
town where I held mass. Now, when I had put on my vest- 
ments and trimmings, and approached the altar, the clerk or 
sexton of the church began merrily to strike upon the lute 
the Kirieleison, whereat I, who scarcely could forbear laugh- 
ing, was constrained to direct and tune my Gloria in excelsis, 
according to his Kirieleiso7i. 

DXV. 

The Jews held theii- offerings ex opere operato; when a 
work was accomplished only externally, they thought that 
thereby sins were reconciled and satisfied, whereas all their 
offerings and sacrifices ought to have been signs of thanks- 
giving. 

Even so is it likewise with the papists' error of the mass, 
whereby the mass-priest, an unlearned ass, affects to give full 
satisfaction for sins. 

DXVT. 

The mass ought to be abolished, chiefly for two reasons. 
First, because natural understanding judges that it is a dis- 
honest kind of trading and gain to celebrate mass for two- 
pence, or to sell it for three-half-pence. Secondly, because, 
according to the spirit, it is judged to be an abominable 
idolatry, making Christ to have died in vain, seeing they 
pretend thereby to make full satisfaction for sins with mere 
works. These two abuses are altogether inexcusable, yet all 



OF ANTICHRIST. 225 

universities have conspired and vowed to maintain the mass. 
We can never agree with the papists as to this point. For if 
they should suffer the mass to be abolished, they must make 
full restitution of that which, with their lies and deceit, they 
Lave got and stolen from emperors, kings, princes, nobility, 
and other people. 

DXVII. 

Many Italians are well inclined to the Protestant religion, 
and would have been well satisfied therewith had I not touched 
the mass, to reject which they hold to be an abominable 
heresy. Tliey depend thereon so surely, that they think he 
who has heard mass is free from all danger, and cannot sin, 
whatsoever he take in hand, and tliat no evil can befal him; 
hence it comes to pass, that after hearing mass, many sins 
and murders are committed. When I was at Rome, there 
was one who had sought his enemy tw^o whole years, to be 
revenged upon him, but had not been able to find him out; 
at last, he spied him in the church, where he himself had 
heard mass, having just risen from before the altar; he forth- 
with stepped to him, stabbed him to death, and fled. My 
book on the abolition of the mass is written with much 
vehemence against the blasphemers, but it is not for those 
who are not entering upon the true path, who have just be- 
come born to the new life; nor should these be offended 
thereat; if, twenty years ago, any one had presumed to 
take from me the mass, he must have tugged hard, before he 
got it from me; for ray heart hung thereon, and I adored it; 
now, God be praised, I am of another mind, and am fully 
assured, that the foundation and ground of the mass, and of 
Popedom, is nothing but imposture, extortion, and idolatry. 

DXVIII. 

Missa, the mass, comes of the Hebrew word Maosim, that 
is, a collecting of alms, a stipend, or a tax for the sake of 
priests, or other people. The mass has devoured infinite 
sums of monev. 



J??6 Luther's table-talk 



OF PURGATORY 



AuGUSTiN, Ambrose, and Jerome held nothing at all of pur- 
gatory. Gregory, being in the night-time deceived by a 
vision, taught something of purgatory, whereas God openly 
commanded that we' should search out and inquire nothing of 
spirits, but of Moses and the prophets. 

Therefore we must not admit Gregory's opinion on this 
point; the day of the Lord will show and declare the same, 
when it will be revealed by fire. 

This sentence, " And their works do follow them," must 
not be understood of purgatory, but of the doctrine of good 
works, or of godly and true Christians, and of heretics. Arius, 
the heretic, has had his judgment; the fire of faith has de- 
clared it. For the last day will discover and declare all 
things. 

God has, in his word, laid before us two ways; one which 
by faith leads to salvation, — the other, by unbelief, to dam- 
nation. 

As for purgatory, no place in Scripture makes mention 
thereof, neither must we any M'ay allow it; for it dai'kens 
and undervalues the grace, benefits, and merits of our blessed, 
sweet Saviour Christ Jesus. 

The bounds of purgatory extend not beyond this world; for 
here in this life the upright, good, and godly Christiaiis are 
well and soundly scoured and purged. 



OF COUNCILS, 

The pope styles himself a bishop of the catuoiic cnurcti, 
which title he never dared to take upon him before; for at 
the time when the council of Nicea was held, then there was 
no pope at all. The church at that time was divided into 
three parts; first, of Ethiopi;i; second, of Syria, to wdiich 
Antioch belonged; third, of Rome, with her appertaining 



OF COUNCILS. " 227 

sects. In this manner they swarmed soon after the apostles' 
time, and instituted three sorts of councils; first, a general, 
second, a provincial, third, an episcopal, a council being to be 
held in every bishopric. 

DXXI. 

Since the time of the apostles, threescore general and pro- 
vincial councils have been held, among which only four are 
especially worthy of praise; two, those of Nicea and Constan- 
tinople, maintained and defended the Trinity and the god- 
head of Christ; the other two, those of Ephesus and 
Chalcedon, maintained Christ's humanity. In the council of 
Nicea nothing is written or mentioned of any pope or bishop 
of Rome, as being there; only one bishop from the west, 
Ozius, bishop of Cordova, was present. The other bishops 
came from the churches in the east, Greece, Asia Minor, 
Egypt, Africa, &c. 

Ah, Lord God! what are councils and conventions but 
grasping and vanity, wherein men dispute about titles, honours, 
precedence, and other fopperies? Let us consider what has 
been done by these councils in three hundred years; nothing 
but what concerns externals and ceremonies; nothing at all 
touching true divine doctrine, the upright worshipping of 
God, or faith. 

DXXII, 

In January, 1539, a book was sent to Luther, intituled, 
Liber Conciliorum, a large and carefully arranged collection. 
After reading it he said: this book will maintain and defend 
the pope, whereas in his own decrees, innumerable canons are 
against him and this book. And besides, councils have no 
power to make and ordain laws and ordinances in the church, 
what is to be taught and to be believed, or concerning good 
works; for all this has been already taught and confirmed. 
Councils have power to make ordinances only concerning 
external things, customs, and ceremonies; and this no further 
than as concerns persons, places, and times. When these 
cease, such ordinances also cease. 

The Romish laws are now dead and gone, by reason Rome 
is dead and gone: it is now another place. In like man- 
ner, the decrees and ordinances of councils are now no longer 
valid, because their days have gone by. As St. Paul says: 
"Why, as though living in the world, are ye subject to ordi- 

q2 



228 Luther's table-talk. 

nances? (touch not, taste not, handle not, which all are to 
perish with the using) after the commandments of men? 
which things have indeed a show of wisdom in will-worship 
and humility, and neglecting of the body, not in any honour 
to the satisfying of the flesh." 

Did not decrees and statutes, like persons, times, and places, 
change and cease, the doctrine would of a mortal creature 
make an immortal; and, indeed, they name the pope an earthly 
god, fitly enough, for all his laws, decrees, and ordinances, 
savour of terrestrial, not of celestial things 

DXXIII. 

When God's Word is by the Fathers expounded, construed, 
and glossed, then, in my judgment, it is even as when one 
strains milk through a coal-sack, which must needs spoil and 
make the milk black ; God's Word of itself is pure, clean, 
bright, and clear; but, through the doctrines, books, and 
writings of the Fathers, it is darkened, falsified, and spoiled. 

DXXIV. 

The council of Nicea, held after the apostles' time, was the 
very best and purest; but, by and bye, in the time of the 
emperor Constantine, it was weakened by the Arians; for at 
that time, out of dissembling hearts, they craftily subscribed 
that they concurred in one opinion with the true and upright 
catholic teachers, which in truth was not so; whereof ensued 
a great dissension. 

DXXV. 

The papists go craftily about endeavouring to suppress us; 
they intend such a reformation should be made, as will in 
noway suit us to adopt; if, for the sake of outward peace, we 
enter into accord with the papists, we should make the pure 
doctrine of our church suspected. Oh no; no such agreements 
for me. If the emperor Charles would appoint a national 
council, then there were some hope; but he will not go on : 
the papists will not yield, but will sit alone therein, and have 
full power to determine and conclude. By my advice, if it so 
fall out, we will all arise and leave them sitting alone; for 
the pope shall have no authority or power over us and our 
doctrine. We need no council for the sake of God's Word, 
fcr that is sure enough. We can well appoint and order fast- 



OF COUNCILS, 229 

ings and such like things without a council, and without 
ensnaring the consciences, which shall be at liberty, and not 
troubled or tied therewith. Christ did not institute and com- 
mand fastings with laws, but says: " When the bridegroom 
shall be taken from them, then they shall fast." Also he says: 
" Go, sell all that thou hast." Fasting will follow thereupon. 
The Italians are so stiff-necked and proud, they will not be 
reformed by the Germans, no, not though they be convinced 
with the clear truth of God's Word. I have often thought 
with myself, how we might by a council, in some measure, 
come to an agreement between us, but I see no means can be 
found. For if the pope should acknowledge he had failed 
but in the least article, and should admit, in a council, his 
gross errors, then he would lose his authority and power; for 
he brags that he is the church's head, to whom all the mem- 
bers must yield obedience; hence the complaint in the council 
at Constance, and hence that council's setting itself over and 
above the pope, and deposing him. If the papists should give 
place to us, and yield in the least article, then the hoops in the 
garland were quite broken asunder, and all the world would 
cry out: Has it not been constantly affirmed that the pope is 
the head of the church and cannot err? How then comes he 
now to acknowledge his errors? 

DXXVI. 

In a council ought to be two manner of voices; the first, 
the vox consultiva vel deliberativa, that is, when they consult 
and discourse concerning affairs, open to kings, princes, and 
doctors, for each one to deliver his opinion. The second they 
call decisiva vox, a deciding voice, when they conclude what 
is to be believed and done; which voice the pope and his car- 
dinals have usurped; for they decide and conclude what they 
will and please. 

DXXVII. 

A council should be a purgatory, to purge, cleanse, and 
reform the church; and when new errors and heresies break 
and press in, to confirm, strengthen, and preserve pure doctrine, 
and resist, hinder, and quench new fires, and condemn false 
doctrine. But the pope would have a council to be one 
assembly, wherein he daily might make new decrees, orders 
and statutes, touching good works. 



230 Luther's table-talk. 

DXXVIII. 

The imperial diet held at Augsburg, 1530, is worthy of all 
praise; for then and thence came the gospel among the people 
in other countries, contrary to the will and expectation both of 
emperor and pope. God appointed the imperial diet at Augs- 
burg, to the end the gospel should be spread further abroad 
and planted. They over -climbed themselves at Augsburg, 
for the papists openly approved there of our doctrine. Before 
that diet was held, the papists had made the emperor believe, 
that our doctrine was altogether frivolous; and that when he 
came to the diet, he should see them put us all to silence, so that 
none of us should be able to speak a word in the defence of our 
religion; but it fell out far otherwise; for we openly and 
freely confessed the gospel before the emperor and the whole 
empire, and confounded our adversaries in the highest degree. 
The emperor discriminated understandingly and discreetly, 
and carried himself princely in this cause of religion; he 
found us far otherwise than the papists had informed him; 
and that we were not ungodly people, leading most wicked 
and detestable lives, and teaching against the hrst and second 
tables of the ten commandments of God. For this cause the 
emperor sent our confession and apology to all the univer- 
sities; his council also delivered their opinions, and said: "If 
the doctrines of these men be against the holy Christian faith, 
then his imperial majesty should suppress it with all his 
power. But if it be only against ceremonies and abuses, as it 
appears to be, then it should be referred to the consideration 
and j udgment of learned people, or good and wise counsel. 

0! God's word is powerful; the more it is persecuted, the 
more and further it spreads itself abroad. I would fain the 
papist confutation might appear to the world; for I would 
set upon that old torn and tattered skin, and so baste it, that 
the stitches thereof should fly about; but they shun the 
light. This time twelvemonth no man would have given a 
farthing for the protestants, so sure the ungodly papists were 
of us. For when my most gracious lord and master, the 
prince elector of Saxony, came before other princes to the 
diet, the papists marvelled much thereat, for they verily 
believed he would not have appeared, because, as they 
imagined, his cause was too bad and foul to be brought before 
the light. But what fell out? even this, that in their greatest 



OF COUNCILS 



231 



security they were overwhelmed with the utmost fear and 
affright, because the prince elector, like an upright prince, 
appeared so early at Augsburg. The popish princes swiftly 
posted away to Inspruck, where they held serious council 
with prince George, and the marquis of Baden, all of them 
wondering what the prince elector's so early approach to the 
diet should mean, and the emperor himself was astonished, 
and doubted whether he could come and go in safety; where- 
upon the princes were constrained to promise that they would 
stand, body, goods, and blood by the emperor, one offering to 
maintain 6000 horse, another so many thousands of foot 
soldiers, &c., to the end his majesty might be the better 
secured. Then was a wonder among wonders to be seen, in 
that God struck with fear and cowardliness the enemies oi 
the truth. And although at that time the prince elector ot 
Saxony was alone, and but only the hundredth sheep, the 
others being ninety and nine, yet it so fell out, that they all 
trembled and were afraid. When they came to the point, 
and began to take the business in hand, there appeared but a 
very small heap that stood by God's Word. But, that small 
heap, brought with us a strong and mighty King, a King 
above all emperors and kings, namely, Christ Jesus, the 
powerful Word of God. Then all the papists cried out, and 
said: Oh, it is insufferable, that so small and mean a heap 
should set themselves against the imperial power. But the 
Lord of Hosts frustrates the councils of princes. Pilate had 
power to put our blessed Saviour to death, but wnllingly he 
would not. Annas and Caiaphas willingly would have done 
it, but could not. 

The emperor, for his own part, is good and honest; but 
the popish bishops and cardinals are undoubted knaves. And 
forasmuch as the emperor now refuses to bathe his hands in 
innocent blood, the frantic princes bestir themselves, and 
scorn and contemn the good emperor in the highest degree. 
The pope also for anger is ready to burst in pieces, be- 
cause the diet should be dissolved without shedding oi 
blood; therefore he sends the sword to the duke of Bavaria, 
intending to take the crown from the emperor's head, and set 
it upon the head of Bavaria; but he shall not accomplish it. 
In this manner ordered God the business, that kings, princes, 
yea, and the pope himself, fell from the emperor, and we 



232 Luther's table-talk 

joined him, which was a great wonder of God's providence, 
in that he whom the devil intended to use against us, God 
takes, and uses for us. O wonder above all wonders ! 



OF THE FATHERS OF THE CHURCH. 

DXXIX. 

I WILL not presume to criticise too closely the writings of 
the Fathers, seeing they are received of the church, and have 
great applause, for then I should be held an apostate; but 
whoso reads Chrysostom, will find he digresses from the chiei 
points, and proceeds to other matters, saying nothing, or very 
little, of that which pertains to the business. When I was 
expounding the Epistle to the Hebrews, and turned to what 
Chrysostom had written thereupon, I found nothing to the 
purpose; yet I believe that he at that time, as being the 
chief rhetorician, had many hearers, though he taught with- 
out profit; for the chief oflSce of a preacher is to teach 
uprightly, and diligently to look to the chief points and 
grounds whereon he stands, and so instruct and teach the 
hearers, that they understand aright, and may be able to say: 
this is well taught. When this is done, he may avail himself 
of rhetoric to adorn his subject and admonish the people. 

DXXX. 

Behold what great darkness is in the books of the Fathers 
concerning faith; yet if the article of justification be darkened, 
it is impossible to smother the grossest errors of mankind. 
St. Jerome, indeed, wrote upon Matthew, upon the Epistles 
to Galatians and Titus; but, alas! very coldly. Ambrose 
wrote six books upon the first book of Moses, but they are 
very poor. Augustin wrote nothing to the purpose con- 
cerning faith; for he was first roused up and made a man by 
the Pelagians, in striving against them. I can find no 
exposition upon the Epistles to the Romans and Galatians, 
wherein anything is taught pure and aright. O what a 
happy time have we now, in regard to the purity of the 
doctrine; but alas! w^e little esteem it. After the Fathers 



OF THE BOOKS OF THE FATHERS. 233 

came the pope, and with his mischievous traditions and human 
ordinances, like a breaking water-cloud and deluge, overflowed 
the church, snared consciences, touching eating of meat, friars' 
hoods, masses, &c., so that daily he brought abominable errors 
into the church of Christ; and to serve his own turn, took 
hold on St. Augustin's sentence, where he says, Evangelio non 
crederem^ &c. The asses could not see what occasioned 
Augustin to utter that sentence, whereas he spoke it against 
the Manicheans, as much as to say: I believe you not, for ye 
are damned heretics, but I believe and hold with the church, 
the spouse of Christ, which cannot err. 

DXXXI. 

Epiphanius compiled a history of the church long before 
Jerome; his writings are good and profitable, and, if sepa- 
rated from dissentious arguments, worth printing. 

DXXXII. 

I much like the hymns and spiritual songs of Prudentius; 
he was the best of the Christian poets; if he had lived in the 
time of Virgil, he would have been extolled above Horace. 
I wish the verses of Prudentius were read in schools, but 
schools are now become heathenish, and the Holy Scripture 
is banished from them, and sophisticated through philosophy. 

DXXXIII. 

We must read the Fathers cautiously, and lay them in the 
gold balance, for they often stumbled and went astray, and 
mingled in their books many monkish things. Augustin had 
more work and labour to wind himself out of the Fathers' 
writings, than he had with the heretics. Gregory expounds 
the five pounds mentioned in the gospel, which the husband- 
man gave to his servants to put to use, to be the five senses, 
which the beasts also possess. The two pounds, he construes 
to be the reason and understandino-. 



The more I read the books of the Fathers, the more I find 
myself offended; for they were but men, and, to speak the 
truth, with all their repute and authority, undervalued the 
books and writings of the sacred apostles of Christ. The 
papists were not ashamed to say, What is the Scripture? we 



234 Luther's table-talk, 

must read the holy fathers and teachers, for they drew and 
sucked the honey out of the Scripture. As if God's Word 
were to be understood and conceived by none but by them- 
selves, whereas the heavenly Father says: *' Him shall ye 
hear," who in the gospel taught most plainly in parables and 
similitudes. 

DXXXV. 

Augustin was the ablest and purest of all the doctors, but 
he could not of himself bring back things to their original 
condition, and he often complains that the bishops, with 
their traditions and ordinances, troubled the church more 
than did the Jews with their laws. 

DXXXVI. 

Faithful Christians should heed only the embassy of our 
blessed Saviour Christ, and what he says. All they who 
alter and construe the gospel through human authority, 
power, and repute, act very unchristianlike and against God. 
No temporal potentate allows his ambassador to exceed his 
instructions, not in one word; yet we, in this celestial and 
divine embassage and legation, will be so presumptuous as to 
add and diminish to and from our heavenly instructions, 
according to our own vain conceits and self-will. 

Dxxxvn. 
I am persuaded that if at this time, St. Peter, in person, 
should preach all the articles of Holy Scripture, and only 
deny the pope's authority, power, and primacy, and say, that 
the pope is not the head of all Christendom, they would 
cause him to be hanged. Yea, if Christ himself were again 
on earth, and should preach, without all doubt the pope 
would crucify him again. Therefore let us expect the same 
treatment; but better is it to build upon Christ, than upon 
the pope. If, from my heart, I did not believe that after 
this life there were another, then I would sing another 
song, and lay the burthen on another's neck. 

DXXXVIII. 

Lyra's Commentaries upon the Bible are worthy of all 
praise. I will order them diligently to be read, for they are 
exceeding good, especially on the historical part of the Old 



OF THE BOOKS OF THE FATHERS 235 

Testament. Lyra is very profitable to him that is well 
versed in the New Testament,. The commentaries of Paulus 
and Simigerus are very cold; they may well be omitted and 
left out, if Lyra should be reprinted. 

DXXXIX. 

Jerome should not be numbered among the teachers of the 
church, for he was a heretic; yet I believe that he is saved 
through faith in Christ. He speaks not of Christ, but 
merely carries his name in his mouth. 

"^ DXL. 

The Terminists, among whom I was, are sectaries in 
the high schools; they oppose the Thomists, the Scotists, and 
the Albertists; they are also called Occamists, from Occam, 
their founder. They are of the newest sect, and are now 
strongest in Paris. 

The question with them was, whether the word humanitas 
means a general humanity, residinsr in every human creature, 
as Thomas and others hold. The Occamists and Terminists 
say: It is not in general, but it is spoken in particular of 
every human creature; as a picture of a human creature 
signifies every human creature. 

They are called Terminists, because they speak of a thing 
in its own proper words, and do not apply them after a 
strange sort. With a carpenter we must speak in his terms, 
and with such words as are used in his craft, as a chisel, an 
axe. Even so we must let the words of Christ remain, and 
speak of the sacraments in suis tertninis, with such words as 
Christ used and spake; as "Do this," must not be turned 
into " OiFer this:" and the word corpus must not signify both 
kinds, as the papists tear and torment the words, and wilfully 
wrest them against the clear text. 

DXLl. * 

The master of sentences, Peter Lombard, was a very dili- 
gent man, and of a high understanding; he wrote many 
excellent things. If he had wholly given himself to the 
Holy Scriptures, he had been indeed a great and a leading 
doctor of the church: but he introduced into his books un- 
profitable questions, sophisticating and mingling all together. 
The school divines were fine and delicate wits, but they lived 



236 Luther's table-talk. 

not in such times as we. They got so far that they taught 
mankind ^vere not complete, pure, or sound, but wounded in 
part, yet they said people by their own power, without grace, 
could fulfil the law; though when they had obtained grace, 
they were able more easily to accomplish the law, of their 
own proper power. 

Such and the like horrible things they taught; but they 
neither saw nor felt Adam's fall, nor that the law of God is 
a spiritual law, requiring a complete and full obedience 
inwardly and outwardly, both in body and soul. 

DXLII. 

Gabriel Biel wrote a book upon the canon in the mass, 
which at that time I held for the best; my heart bled when 
I read it. I still keep those books which tormented me. 
Scotus wrote very well upon the Magister sententiariim, and 
diligently essayed to teach upon those matters. Occam was 
an able and sensible man. 



OF THE PATRIARCHS AND PROPHETS. 

DXLIII. 

David's fall was very offensive, for the holy man fell into 
adultery, murder, and despising of God. He was afterwards 
visited and punished by God in such sort, that the whole 
nation forsook him. His counsellors — yea, his best beloved 
son, conspired and made a league against him, who before 
had such high fortune, and was held in such esteem. 

On account of these offences, the ungodly, doubtless, 
boasted, and said: " Where is the king now? where is now 
his God? what has become of his good fortune and pro- 
sperity?" For no doubt there were many kings more powerful 
than David; as the king of the Moabites, whom Isaiah calls 
a three-y eared cow; that is, strong, powerful, and fat. 

It has always been so in the world — that it has gone evil 
with the godly, and well with the ungodly; of this complaint 
is made in many Psalms. We see at this day, that the 
popish bishops and ungodly princes live in great honour, 



OF THE PATRIARCHS AND PROPHETS. 237 

wealth, and power, while good and God-fearing people are in 
poverty, disgrace, and trouble. 

The Greek tragedies are not to be compared with the his- 
tory of David. 

DXLIV. 

All kings, princes, rulers, and ministers, sin of necessity, 
and therefore have special need of the remission of sins. I 
am persuaded that Ahab was saved, inasmuch as God said to 
the prophet: " Seest thou not how Ahab boweth himself 
before me?" For to whom God affords speech, that is, his 
word and promise, with him it stands well. Therefore, 
doubtless, he was saved, notwithstanding the Scriptures 
witness against him, even to his death. He believed the 
promise of the Messiah, and so at his death got hold of the 
forgiveness of sins. In like manner I am persuaded also of all 
those of whom the Scripture says: " And he slept with his 
fathers," that they are all in heaven. For this word, slept, 
shows some good in the Scriptures. But of whom it is 
written: They were made away and slain by the enemies, 
or were devoured and torn in pieces by wild beasts, I am 
persuaded they are lost and damned. 

DXLV. 

Although God charged David to build the temple, he 
could not perform it, because he had shed much blood, and 
had carried the sword; not that he did wrong therein, but 
that he could not be the figure or type of Christ, who must 
have a peaceable kingdom, without shedding of blood. But 
Solomon was to accomplish it, who is called peaceable, through 
which Clii'ist's kingdom was signified. 

DXLVI. 

It is with us, as it was in the time of Judas Maccab^eus, 
who defended his people, and yet was not able to suppress 
the enemies who possessed the government; while his own 
people were unthankful, and wrought him great mischief; 
these two oppressions make one weary. 

The legends of the patriarchs far excelled the holiness of 
aU the saints; for they went on in simple obedience towards 
God, in the works of their vocation. They performed such 
things as came to their hand, according to God's command, 



238 Luther's table-talk. 

without respect; therefore Sara. Abraham's wife, excels all 
other women. 

DXLVIl 

Philip Melancthon demanded of Luther: how it was, that 
though David was instituted and ordained a king immediately 
of God, yet he had many tribulations and plagues, as his 
psalms show? Luther said: David was not acquainted with 
many good days: lie was plagued by the ungodly and false 
teachers, he saw that his people banded against him. he en- 
dured and suiFered many insurrections and tumults, which 
taught him his lesson to pray. When he was without tribu- 
lation, he grew giddy-headed and secure, as we see in his 
adultery, and his murder of Uriah. 

Ah, Lord God! how is it thou sufferest such great people to 
fall? This David had six wives, who doubtless were wise 
and understanding women; as was the wise Abigail; if they 
were all such, he was furnished with surpassing wives. More- 
over, he had ten concubines; yet, notwithstanding, he was 
an adulterer. 

DXLVIU. 

Job had many tribulations; he was also plagued of his own 
friends, who fiercely assaulted him. The text says, that his 
friends fell upon him, and v/ere full of v/ratli against him; 
they tormented him thoroughly, but he held his peace, suf- 
fered them to talk their talk, as if he should say, you know 
not what you prate about. Job is an example of God's good- 
ness and mercy; for how upright and holy soever he was, yet 
he sorely fell into temptation; but he was not forsaken, he 
was again delivered and redeemed through God's grace and 
mercy. 

DXLIX. 

Melancthon discoursing with Luther touching the prophet; , 
who continually boast thus: " Thus saith the Lord," asked 
whether God in person spoke with them or no. Luther rephed: 
They were very holy, spiritual people, who seriously con- 
templated upon holy and divine things; therefore God spake 
with them in their consciences, which the prophets held as 
sure and certain revelations. 



OF THE PATRIARCHS AND PROPHETS. 239 

We read in the books of the Jews that Isaiah was slain by 
king Ahaz, because he said: " I saw the Lord sitting upon a 
throne," &c. Doubtless, Ahaz said unto him: Thou wretch! 
how darest thou presume to say, " Thou hast seen the Lord?" 
whereas God said to Moses, " Shall a man see me, and live?" 
Thou art an insane heretic; thou blasphemest God; thou art 
worthy of death; take him away. And many think it quite 
iust that Isaiah was slain for this, not enduring that any 
man should say he had done or seen greater things than 
Moses. 

DL. 

The history of Elijah is awful, and almost incredible. It 
was a fierce anger indeed, that so holy a man should pray 
it might not rain; but he saw that the teachers were slain, 
and that good and God-fearing people were hunted down, and 
persecuted. Therefore he prayed against those upon whom, 
with words and preaching, he could not prevail. 



The majesty of the prophet Jonah is surpassing. He has 
but four chapters, and yet he moved therewith the wdiole 
kingdom, so that in his weakness, he was justly a figure and 
a sign of the Lord Christ. Indeed, it is surprising, that Christ 
should recur to this but in four words. Moses likewise, in 
few words describes the creation, the history of Abraham, and 
other great mysteries; but he spends much time in describing 
the tent, the external sacrifices, the kidneys and so on; the 
reason is, he saw that the world greatly esteemed outward 
things, which they beheld with their carnal eyes, but that 
which was spiritual, they soon forgot. 

The history of the prophet Jonah is almost incredible, 
sounding more strange than any poet's fable; if it were not 
in the Bible, I should take it for a lie; for consider, how for 
the space of three days he was in the great belly of the whale, 
whereas in tliree hours he might have been digested and 
changed into the nature, flesh and blood of that monster; may 
not this be said, to live in the midst of death? In compari- 
son of this miracle, the wonderful passage through the Red Sen. 
was nothin": 



240 Luther's table-talk. 

But what appears more strange is, that after he was deli- 
vered, he began to be angry, and to expostulate with the 
gracious God, touching a small matter not worth a straw. It is 
a great mystery. I am ashamed of my exposition upon this 
prophet, in that I so weakly touch the main point of this 
wonderful miracle. 

DLII. 

The harsh and sharp words of the prophets go to the heart, 
yet when they say: "Jerusalem shall fall, and be destroyed," 
the Jews held such preaching merely heretical, and would 
lot endure it. 

Even so say I: the Romish church shall fall, and be 
destroyed; but the papists will neither believe nor endure it; 
it is impossible, say they, for it is written in the article: " I 
believe in the holy Christian church." Many kings were 
destroyed before Jerusalem, as Sennacherib, &c. ; when 
the prophet Jeremiah said : " Jerusalem shall be de- 
stroyed," which he spake through the Holy Ghost, so it fell 
out. 

If the pope could bring against me only one such argument 
as the Jews had against Jeremiah and other prophets, it 
were not possible for me to subsist. But the pope disputes 
with me, not according to justice and equity, but with the 
sword and his power. He uses no w^ritten law, but club law. 
If I had no other argument against the pope than de facto, I 
would instantly hang myself; but my dispute is^w*. 

DLIII. 

An upright Christian is like unto Jonah, who was cast 
into the sea, that is, into hell. He beheld the mouth of the 
monster gaping to devour him, and lay three days in its dark 
belly, without consuming. This history should be unto us 
one of the greatest comforts, and a manifest sign of the 
resurrection from the dead. 

In such sort does God humble those that are his. But 
afterwards, Jonah went too far; he presumed to command 
God Almighty, and became a great man-slayer and a mur- 
derer, for he desired that a great city and many people should 
be utterly destroyed, though God chose to spare them. TliiH 
was a strange saint. 



OF THE PATRIARCHS AND PROPHETS. 241 
DLIV. 

To translate the prophets well from the Hebrew tongue, is 
a precious, great, and glorious work; no man before me well 
attained thereunto, and to me it is a hard task; let me be 
once clear from it, it shall rest. 

DLV. 

It is easy to be conceived, that David dealt uprightly, and 
repentinglj^, in not rejecting Bathsheba, Uriah's wife, but 
marrying her. Forasmuch as he had shamed her, it was 
fitting for him to restore her to honour. God was also 
pleased with that conjunction; yet, for a punishment of the 
adultery, God caused the son, begotten in it, soon to die 

DLVI. 

No man, since the apostles' time, has rightly understood 
the legend of Abraham. The apostles themselves did not 
sufficiently extol or explain Abraham's faith, according to its 
worth and greatness. I much marvel that Moses so slightly 
remembers him. 

DLVII. 

Job at one time lost ten children and all his cattle; he was 
punished in body and in goods, yet it was nothing in compa- 
rison of David's troubles, for though David had the promise 
which could neither fail nor deceive — namely, where God 
says: " Thou shalt be king," God thoroughly powdered and 
peppered his kingdom for his tooth; no miserable man ever 
surpassed David. 

DLVIII. 

Adam had more children than the three that are mentioned 
in the Bible. The reason why particular mention is made 
of Seth, is the genealogy of our Lord Christ, who was de- 
scended from that patriarch. Adam, doubtless, had many sons 
and daughters, full two hundred, I am persuaded, for he lived 
to a great, great age, nine hundred and thirty years. It is 
likely that Cain was born thirty years after the fall of his 
parents, as they were then comforted again. I believe they 
were often comforted by the angels, otherwise it had been 
impossible for them to enjoy each other's society, by reason 
they were filled with great sorrows and fears. At the last 



242 LUTHER S TABLE-TALK. 

day, it will be known that Eve exceeded all women in sorrow 
and misery. Never came into the world a more miserable 
woman than Eve; she saw that for her sake we were all to 
die. Some affirm that Cain was conceived before the pro- 
mise of the seed that should crush the serpent's head. But 
I am persuaded that the promise was made not half a day 
after the fall; for they entered into the garden about noon, 
and having appetites to eat, she took the apple; then, about 
two of the clock, according to our account, was the fall. 

DLIX. 

The reason that Abraham gave to Agar, his concubine, 
and Ishmael, his son, only one flagon of wine, was that she 
might know she had no right to demand anything of the in- 
heritance, but that what was given her proceeded out of good 
will, not of any obligation or reason of law^, yet that, never- 
theless, she might repair again to Abraham, and fetch more. 

The text in Genesis says: " Isaac and Ishmael buried 
Abraham;" hence it appears that Ishmael was not always 
with his father, but was nurtured out of the father's good- 
ness and bounty, which was done to this end, that Abraham, 
intending to lead Christ through the right line, therefore 
Ishmael was separated like Esau. 



I hold that Jacob was a poor, perplexed man; I would 
willingly, if I could, frame a Laban out of the rich glutton in 
the gospel of Luke, and a Jacob out of Lazarus who lay be- 
fore the gate. I am glad that Rachael sat upon the idols, 
thereby to spite her father Laban. 



Neither Cicero, nor Virgil, nor Demosthenes, are to be 
compared with David, in point of eloquence, as we see in the 
119th Psalm, which he divides into two and twenty parts, 
each composed of eight verses, and yet all having but one 
thought — thy law is good. He had great gifts, and was 
highly favoured of God. I hold that God suffered him to faU 
so horribly, lest he should become too haughty and proud. 



OF THE PATRIARCHS AND PROPHETS. 243 



Some are of opinion that David acted not well in that, 
upon his death -bed, he commanded Solomon his son to punish 
Shimei, who had cursed and thrown dirt at him, in his flight 
before Absalom. But I say he did well, for the office of a 
magistrate is to punish the guilty, and wicked malefactors. 
He had made a vow, indeed, not to punish him, but that was 
to hold only so long as he lived. 

In so strange and confused a government, where no man 
knew who was cook or who butler, as we used to say, David 
was often constrained to look through the fingers at many 
abuses and wrongs. But afterwards, when in Solomon's 
time, there was peace, then through Solomon he punished. 
In tumultuous governments, a ruler dares not proceed as in 
time of peace, yet, at last, it is fitting that evil be punished; 
and as David says: Maledixit mihi maledictionem malam. 

DLXIII. 

Hezekiah was a very good and pious king, full of faith, 
yet he fell. God cannot endure that a human creature should 
trust and depend upon his own works. No man can enter 
into heaven, without the remission of sins. 



Elisha dealt uprightly, in permitting the children to be 
torn in pieces by two bears, for calling him bald-pate, since 
they mocked not him, but his God. And so as to the jeerino- 
and mocking of Elijah: " Thou man of God," &c., 'twas 
just that fire came down from heaven and devoured the 
mockers. 

DLXV. 

Many strange things, according to human sense and reason, 
are written in the books of the kings; they seem to be slight 
and simple books, but in the spirit they are of great weight. 
David endured much; Saul persecuted and plagued him ten 
whole years; yet David remained constant in faith, and be- 
lieved that the kingdom pertained unto him. I should have 
gone my way, and said: Lord! thou hast deceived me; wilt 
thou make me a king, and sufFerest me in this sort to be tor- 
mented, persecuted, and plagued? But David was like a 
strong wall. He was also a good and a godly man; he refused 

r2 



244 Luther's table-talk. 

to lay hands on the king when he had fit opportunity; for he 
had Grod's word, and that made him remain so steadfast; he 
was sure that God's word and promise never would or could 
fail him. 

Surely Jonathan was an honest man, w^hom David loved 
entirely; he marked well that the kingdom belonged to David, 
therefore he intreated David not to root out him and his. 
Jonathan also wrought wonders, when he, alone with his 
armour-bearer, went over the mountain, and slew and de- 
stroyed the Philistines; for, doubtless, he said in himself, the 
Lord that overcomes with many, is able also to overcome with 
few. His death was a great grief to David. So it often hap- 
pens, that the good are punished for the sake of the wicked 
and ungodly. The Son of God himself was not spared. 



OF THE APOSTLES AND DISCIPLES 
OF CHRIST. 

DLXVI. 

The reason why the disciples were afraid when Christ came 
unto them, the doors being shut, was, that they saw how it 
lately went with their Lord and Master, and feared it might 
go even so with them, especially considering that at the same 
time the Jews intended to act with violence against them. 
For as yet they scarcely believed that Christ was risen again 
from the dead, as may be gathered from the two disciples 
going to Emmaus, who said: We hoped he should have re- 
deemed Israel; as much as to say: Now all our hope is at an 
end. 

DLXVII. 

The reason why the papists boast more of St. Peter than 
of St. Paul is this: St. Paul had the sword, St. Peter the 
keys, and they esteem more of the keys, to open the coffers, 
to 'filch and steal, and to fill their thievish purse, than of the 
sword. That Caiaphas, Pilate, and St. Peter came to Rome, 
and appeared before the emperor, is mere fable; the histories 
touching that point do not accord. Christ died in the reign 



OF THE APOSTLES AND DISCIPLES OF CHRIST. 245 

of Tiberius Cnssar, who governed five years after his deatli. 
All histories unanimously agree, that St. Peter and St. Paul 
died under the emperor Nero, whose last year was the five 
and twentieth year after the death of Christ. But St. Peter 
was eighteen years at Jerusalem after Christ's death, as the 
Epistle to the Galatians witnesses; and after that, he was 
seven years at Antioch. Then, as they fable, he ruled after- 
wards five-and-twenty years at Rome. 

No pope among them all yet ruled five-and-twenty years; 
and, according to this reckoning, St. Peter was not crucified 
under Nero. Saint Luke writes, that St. Paul was two 
whole years at liberty in Rome, and went abroad; he men- 
tions nothing at all of St. Peter. It is a thing not to be be- 
lieved that St. Peter ever was at Rome. 

DLXVIII. 

Saint John the Evangelist wrote, at first, touching the 
true nature of faith — that our salvation depends only upon 
Christ the Son of God and Mary, who purchased it with his 
bitter passion and death, and through the word is received 
into the heart by faith, out of his mere mercy and grace. At 
last he was constrained to write in his epistle also of works, 
by reason of the wickedness of those that, void of all shame, 
abused the gospel through indulging the flesh. 



OF ANGELS. 

DLXIX. 

An angel is a spiritual creature created by God without a 
body, for the service of Christendom and of the church. 

DLXX. 

The acknowledgment of angels is needful in the church. 
Therefore godly preachers should teach them logically. 
First, they should show what angels are, namely, spiritual 
creatures without bodies. Secondly, what manner of spirits 
they are, namely, good spirits and not evil; and here evil 
spirits must also be spoken of, not created evil by God, but 



246 Luther's table-talk^ 

made so bj their rebellion against God, and their consequent 
fall; this hatred began in Paradise, and will continue and 
remain against Christ and his church to the world's end. 
Thirdly, they must speak touching their function, which, as 
the epistle to the Hebrews (chap. i. v. 14) shows, is to 
present a mirror of humility to godly Christians, in that 
such pure and perfect creatures as the angels do minister 
unto us, poor and wretched people, in household and temporal 
policy, and in religion. They are our true and trusty ser- 
vants, performing offices and works that one poor miserable 
mendicant would be ashamed to do for another. In this sort 
ought we to teach with care, method, and attention, touching 
the sweet and loving angels. Whoso speaks of them not in 
the order prescribed by logic, may speak of many irrelevant 
things, but little or nothing to edification. 

DLXXI. 

The angels are near to us, to those creatures whom by 
God's command they are to preserve, to the end we re- 
ceive no hurt of the devil, though, withal, they behold God's 
face, and stand before him. Therefore when the devjl 
intends to hurt us, then the loving holy angels resist and 
drive him away; for the angels have long arms, and although 
they stand before the face and in the presence of God and his 
son Christ, yet they are hard by and about us in those affairs, 
which by God we are commanded to take in hand. The 
devil is also near and about us, incessantly tracking our steps, 
in order to deprive us of our lives, our saving health, and 
salvation. But the holy angels defend us from him, insomuch 
that he is not able to work us such mischief as willingly he 
would. 

DLXXII. 

It were not good for us to know how earnestly the holy 
&ngels strive for us against the devil, or how hard a combat 
it is. If we could see for how many angels one devil makes 
work, we should be in despair. Therefore the Holy Scrip- 
tures refers to them in few words: "He hath given his 
angels charge over thee," &c. Also: " The angel of the Lord 
encampeth round about those that fear him," &c. Now, 
whosoever thou art, that fearest the Lord, be of good 
courage, take thm no care, neither be faint-hearted, nor 



OF THE DEVIL AND HIS "WORKS. 247 

make any doubt of the angels' watching and protection; for 
most certainly they are about thee, and carry thee upon their 
hands. How or in what manner it is done, take thou no 
heed. God says it, therefore it is most sure and certain. 

DLXXIII. 

I believe that the angels are all up in arms, are putting on 
their harness, and girding their swords about them. For the 
last judgment draws nigh, and the angels prepare themselves 
for the combat, and to strike down Turk and pope into the 
bottomless pit. 



OF THE DEVIL AND HIS WORKS. 

DLXXIV. 

The greatest punishment God can inflict on the wicked, is 
when the church, to chastise them, delivers them over to 
Satan, who, with God's permission, kills them, or makes 
them undergo great calamities. Many devils are in woods, 
in waters, in wildernesses, and in dark pooly places, ready to 
hurt and prejudice people; some are also in the thick black 
clouds, which cause hail, lightnings, and thunderings, and 
poison the air, the pastures and grounds. When these 
things happen, then the philosophers and physicians say, it 
is natural, ascribing it to the planets, and showing I know 
not what reasons for such misfortunes and plagues as ensue. 

DLXXV. 

Whoso would see the true picture, shape, or image of the 
devil, and know how he is qualified and disposed, let him 
mark well all the commandments of God, one after another, 
and then let him place before his eyes an oflensive, shameless, 
lying, despairing, ungodly, insolent, and blasphemous man or 
woman, whose mind and conceptions are directed in every 
way against God, and who takes delight in doing people hurt 
and mischief; there thou seest the right devil, carnal and 
corporal. First, in such a person there is no fear, no love, 
no faith or confidence in God, but altogether contempt, 
hatred, unbelief, despair, and blaspheming of God. There 



248 Luther's table-talk. 

thou seest the devil's head, directly opposing the first com- 
mandment. Secondly, a believing Christian takes God's 
name not in vain, but spreads abroad God's TVord, calls upon 
Him from his heart, thanks Him for his benefits, confesses 
Him. But this picture and child of the devil does quite the 
contrary; he holds God's TVord for a fable, fearfully abuses 
God's name, blasphemes God, and withal swears and rages 
abominably, calls upon the evil one and yields unto him. 
There thou seest the mouth and the tongue of the devil, 
directed against the second commandment. Thirdly, a true 
Christian esteems worthily of the office of preaching; he hears 
and learns God's Word with true earnestness and diligence, 
according to Christ's institution and command, not only to 
the amendment and comfort of himself, but also for good 
-example to others; he honours and defends good and godly 
servants of the Word, permits them not to suffer want, &c. 
But this image and child of the devil regards no preaching, 
hears not God's Word, or very negligently, speaks evil 
thereof, perverts it, and makes scoff thereat; yea, hates the 
servants thereof, who, for ought he cares, may famish for 
want of food. There thou seest the ears of the devil, his 
throat and neck of steel, directly against the third command- 
ment. Further, desirest thou to know how the body of the 
devil is shaped and fashioned, then hearken to the following 
commandments of the second table, and take good heed there- 
unto. For first, a good Christian honours his parents, and 
hearkens unto them, to the magistrates, and to the shepherds 
of souls, according as God has commanded. But this child 
of the devil hearkens not to his parents, serves and helps 
them not; nay, dishonours, contemns, and vexes them, for- 
sakes them in their need, is ashamed of them when they 
are poor, and scorns them in their old age; he is disobedient 
to magistrates, and shows unto them no reverence, but 
speaks evil of them; he regards no admonition, reproof, 
civility, or honesty. There thou seest the breast of the 
devil. Secondly, an upright and true Christian envies not 
his neighbour, he bears no ill-will towards him, he desires 
not to be revenged of him, though he have cause, yea, he 
condoles with his neighbour, when hurt and grief assault 
him, helps, and to his power defends him against those who 
seek his life. But this child of the devil, although he cannot 



OF THE DEVIL AND HIS WORKS. 249 

hurt his neighbour in body and life, or murder him with his 
fist, yet he hates and envies him, he is angry with him, and 
is his enemy in his heart, wishes his death, and when it goes 
evil with him, is glad and laughs in his sleeve, &c. There 
thou seest the devil's wrathful and murdering heart. 
Thirdly, a God-fearing Christian lives modestly and 
honestly, shuns all manner of wrongful dealing, stands in fear 
of God's wrath and everlasting punishment. But the child 
of the devil does quite the contrary, is void of all shame and 
chastity, in words, behaviour, and act. There thou seest the 
belly of the devil. Fourthly, a godly Christian lives by his 
labour, by his trade, with a good conscience; he deceives no 
man of that which is his, nay, lends, helps, and gives to the 
needy according to his ability. But this devilish child helps 
none, no, not in the least, but he trades in usury, covets, 
robs, and steals as he may, by power and deceit; he takes all 
manner of advantage to cheat and cozen his neighbour, by 
false wares, measures, weights, &c. There thou seest the 
hands and sharp-pointed claws of the devil. Fifthly, a godly 
creature speaks evil of no man, belies not his neighbour, nor 
bears false witness against him; yea, though he knows hi 
neighbour faulty, yet out of love he covers his infirmities and 
sins, except by the magistrate he be called to confess the 
truth. But this child of the devil does quite the contrary; 
he slanders and backbites, betrays, and falsely accuses his 
neighbour, and perverts that which he has rightly spoken. 
There thou seest the devil's evil and wicked will. Sixth, and 
lastly, a true Christian covets not his neighbour's house, 
inheritance, or wealth, misleads not his wife or his daughter, 
entices not away his servants, covets nothing that is his, yea, 
according to his power, he helps to keep and preserve that 
which belongs to him. But this child of the devil imagines, 
endeavours, and, day and night, seeks opportunity to defraud 
his neighbour of his house, his grounds, lands, and people, to 
draw and entice his wife away unto himself, to flatter away 
his servants, to instigate his neighbour's tenants against him, 
to get his cattle from him, &c. There thou seest the devil's 
lust. Through lies, under the colour of the truth, he seduces 
and deceives godly people, like as he did Adam and Eve in 
Paradise; therefore the more holy the people be, the greater 
is the danger they stand in. For this cause, we ought to 



250 Luther's table-talk. 

beware of the devil, and to take our refuge in Christ, who 
crushed his head, and delivered us from his lies. 

DLXXVI. 

Dr. Luther was asked, whether the Samuel who appeared 
to king Saul, upon the invocation of the pythoness, as is 
related in the first Book of Kings, was really the prophet 
Samuel. The doctor answered: " No, 'twas a spectre, an 
evil spirit, assuming his form. What proves this is, that 
God, by the laws of Moses, had forbidden man to question 
the dead; consequently, it must have been a demon which 
presented itself under the form of the man of God. In 
like manner, an abbot of Spanheim, a sorcerer, exhibited 
to the emperor Maximilian all the emperors his predecessors, 
and all the most celebrated heroes of past times, who defiled 
before him each in the costume of his time. Among them 
were Alexander the Great and Julius Cassar. There was 
also the emperor's betrothed, whom Charles of France stole 
from him. But these apparitions were all the work of the 
demon." 

DLXXVII. 

No malady comes upon us from God, who is good, and 
wishes us well; they all emanate from the devil, who is the 
cause and author of plagues, fevers, &c. A\^hen he is at 
work with jurisconsults, he engenders all sorts of dissensions 
and machinations, turning justice into injustice. Approaches 
he great lords, princes, kings, he gives birth to wars and 
massacres. Gains he access to divines, he produces the 
worst mischief of all: false doctrines, which seduce and ruin 
men's souls. God alone can check so many calamities. 

DLXXVIII. 

The devil vexes and harasses the workmen in the mines. 
He makes them think they have found fine new veins of 
silver, which, when they have laboured and laboured, turn 
out to be mere illusions. Even in open day, on the surface 
of the earth, he causes people to think they see a treasure 
before them, which vanishes when they would pick it up. 
At times, treasure is really found, but this is by the special 
grace of God. I never had any success in the mines, but 
such was God's will, and I am content. 



OF THE DEVIL AND HIS WORKS. 251 

DLXXIX. 

The emperor Frederic, father of Maximilian, invited a 
necromancer to dine with him, and, by his knowledge of 
magic, turned his guest's hands into griffins' claws. He then 
wanted him to eat, but the man, ashamed, hid his claws 
under the table. 

He took his revenge, however, for the jest played upon 
him. He caused it to seem that a loud altercation was going 
on m the court-yard, and when the emperor put his head out 
of window to see what was the matter, he, by his art, clapped 
on him a pair of huge stag's horns, so that the emperor could 
not get his head into the room again until he had cured the 
necromancer of his disfigurement. I am delighted, said 
Luther, when one devil plagues another. They are net all, 
however, of equal power. 

DLXXX. 

There was at Nieuburg a magician named TVildferer, who, 
one day, swallowed a countryman, with his horse and cart. 
A few hours afterwards, man, horse, and cart, Were all 
found in a slough, some miles off. I have heard, too, 
of a seeming monk, who asked a wagoner, that was taking 
some hay to market, how much he would charge to let him 
eat his fill of hay? The man said, a kreutzer, whereupon 
the monk set to work, and had nearly devoured the whole 
load, when the wagoner drove him off. 

DLXXXI. 

August 25, 1538, the conversation fell upon witches who 
spoil milk, eggs, and butter in farm -yards. Dr. Luther said: 
"I should have no compassion on these witches; I would 
burn all of them. We read in the old law, that the priests 
threw the first stone at such malefactors. 'Tis said this stolen 
butter turns rancid, and falls to the ground when any one 
goes to eat it. He who attempts to counteract and chastise 
these witches, is himself corporeally plagued and tormented 
by their master, the devil. Sundry schoolmasters and 
ministers have often experienced this. Our ordinary sins 
offend and anger God. What, then, must be his wrath 
against witchcraft, which we may justly designate high 
treason against divine majesty, a revolt against the infinite 
power of God. The jurisconsults who have so learnedly and 



252 Luther's table-talk. 

pertinently treated of rebellion, atRrm that the subject who 
rebels against his sovereign, is worthy of death. Does not 
witchcraft, then, merit death, which is a revolt of the crea- 
ture against the Creator, a denial to God of the authority it 
accords to the demon?" 

DLXXXII. 

Dr. Luther discoursed at length concerning witchcraft and 
charms. He said, that his mother had had to undergo infinite 
annoyance from one of her neighbours, who was a witch, 
and whom she was fain to conciliate with all sorts of atten- 
tions; for this witch could throw a charm upon children, 
which made them cry themselves to death. A pastor having 
punished her for some knavery, she cast a spell upon him by 
means of some earth upon which he had walked, and which 
she bewitched. The poor man hereupon fell sick of a 
malady w^iich no remedy could remove, and shortly after 
died. 

DLXXXIII. 

It was asked : Can good Christians and God-fearing 
people also undergo witchcraft? Luther replied: Yes; for 
our bodies are always exposed to the attacks of Satan. The 
maladies I suffer are not natural, but devil's spells. 

DLXXXIV. 

When I was young, some one told me this story: Satan 
had, in vain, set all his craft and subtlety at work to separate 
a married pair that lived together in perfect harmony and 
love. At last, having concealed a razor under each of their 
pillows, he visited the husband, disguised as an old woman, 
and told him that his wife had formed the project of killing 
him; he next told the same thing to the wife. The husband, 
finding the razor under his wife's pillow, became furious 
with anger at her sui)posed wickedness, and cut hsr throat. 
So powerful is Satan in his malice. 

DLXXXV. 

Luther, taking up a caterpillar, said: 'Tis an emblem of 
the devil in its crawling walk, and bears his colours in its 
changing hue. 



OF THE DEVIL AND HIS WORKS. 253 

DLXXXVI. 

"Dr. leather said he had heard from the elector of Saxony, 
John Frederic, that a powerful family in Germany was 
descended from the devil, the founder having been born of a 
succubus. He added this story: A gentleman had a young 
and beautiful wife, who, dying, was buried. Shortly after- 
wards, this gentleman and one of his servants sleeping in the 
same chamber, the wife, who was dead, came at night, bent 
over the bed of the gentleman, as though she were conversing 
with him, and, after awhile, went away again. The servant, 
having twice observed this circumstance, asked his master 
whether he knew that, every ^ight, a woman, clothed in 
white, stood by his bed-side. The master replied, that he 
had slept soundly, and had observed nothing of the sort. The 
next night, he took care to remain awake. The woman 
came, and he asked her who she was, and what she wanted. 
She answered, that she was his wife. He returned: my 
wife is dead and buried. She answered, she had died by 
reason of his sins, but that if he would receive her again, she 
would return to him in Hfe. He said, if it were possible, he 
should be well content. She told him he must undertake 
not to swear, as he was wont to do; for that if he ever did 
so, she should once more die, and permanently quit him. 
He promised this, and the dead woman, returning to seem- 
ing life, dwelt with him, ate, drank, and slept with him, 
and had children by him. One day that he had guests, his 
wife went to fetch some cakes from an adjoining apartment, 
and remained a long time absent. The gentleman grew 
impatient, and broke out into his old oaths. The wife not 
returning, the gentleman, with his friends, went to seek her, 
but slie had disappeared; only, the clothes she had worn 
lay on the floor. She was never again seen. 

DLXXXVII. 

The devil seduces us at first by all the allurements of sin, 
in order thereafter to plunge us into despair: he pampers up 
the flesh, that he may, by and bye, prostrate the spirit. We 
feel no pain in the act of sin, but the soul after it is sad, and 
the conscience disturbed. 



254 Luther's table-talk. , 

dlxxxviii. 

He who will have, for his master and king, Jesus Christ, 
the son of the Virgin, who took upon himself our flesh and 
our blood, will have the devil for his enemy. 

DLXXXIX. 

It is very certain that, as to all persons who have hanged 
themselves, or killed themselves in any other way, 'tis the 
devil who has put the cord round their necks, or the knife to 
their throats. 

DXC. 

A man had a habit, whenever he fell, of saying: " Devil 
take me." He was advised to discontinue this evil custom, 
lest some day the devil should take him at his word. He 
promised to vent his impatience by some other phrase; but, 
one day, having stumbled, he called upon the devil, in the 
way I have mentioned, and was killed upon the spot, falling 
on a sharp-pointed piece of wood. 

DXCI. 

A pastor, near Torgau, came to Luther, and complained 
that the devil tormented him without intermission. The 
Doctor replied: He plagues and harasses me too, but I resist 
him with the arms of faith. I know of one person at Magde- 
burg, who put Satan to the rout, by spitting at him; but this 
example is not to be lightly followed; for the devil is a pre- 
sumptuous spirit, and not disposed to yield. "We run great 
risk when, with him, we attempt more than we can do. One 
man, who relied implicitly on his baptism, when the devil 
presented himself to him, his head furnished with horns, tore 
off one of the horns; but another man, of less faith, who 
attempted the same thing, was killed by the devil. 

Dxcn. 
Henning, the Bohemian, asked Dr. Luther why the devil 
bore so furious a hatred to the human race? The Doctor 
replied: " That ought not to surprise you; see what a hate 
prince George bears me, so that, day and night, he is ever 
meditating how he shall injure me. Nothing would delight 
him more, than to see me undergo a thousand tortures. K 



OF THE DEVIL AND HIS WORKS. 255 

such be the hatred of man, what must the hatred of the 
devil be?" 

DXCIII. 

The devil cannot but be our enemy, since we are against 
him with God's Word, wherewith we destroy his kingdom. 
He is a prince and god of the world, and has a greater 
power than all the kings, potentates, and princes upon earth; 
wherefore he would be revenged of us, and assaults us with- 
out ceasing, as we both see and feel. We have against the 
devil a great advantage; powerful, wicked, and cunning as 
he is, he cannot hurt us, since 'tis not against him we have 
sinned, but against God. Therefore we have nothing to do 
with that arch-enemy; but we confess, and say: "Against 
thee. Lord, have we sinned," &c. We know, through God's 
grace, that we have a gracious God, a'nd a merciful Father 
in heaven, whose wrath against us, Christ Jesus, our only 
Lord and Saviour, has appeased with his precious blood. 
Now, forasmuch as through Christ we have remission of 
sins and peace with God, so must the envious devil be content 
to let us alone, in peace, so that henceforward he can neither 
upbraid nor hit us in the teeth concerning our sins against 
God's laws, for Christ has cancelled and torn in pieces the 
handwriting of our consciences, which was a witness against 
us, and nailed the same to his cross; to God be everlasting 
honour, praise, and glory in Christ Jesus, for the same. Amen. 

DXCIV. 

The devil knows the thoughts of the ungodly, for he in- 
spires them therewith. He sees and rules the hearts of all 
such people as are not kept safe and preserved by God's 
Word; yea, holds them captive in his snares, so that they 
must think, do, and speak according to his will. And Sr. 
Paul says: "The god of this world blindeth the minds of 
them that believe not, lest the light of the glorious gospel of 
Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them," 
&c. And Christ gives a reason how it comes to pass, that 
many hear the Word, yet neither understand nor keep the 
same, where he says: " The devil cometh, and taketh the 
Word out of their hearts, lest they should believe, and be 
saved." Therefore it is no marvel that the devil, through 
his prophets, declares what shall happen and come to pass. 



Vj6 luthers table-talk. 

DXCV. 

The Scripture clearly shows that the devil gives unto man- 
kind evil thoughts, and suggests evil projects to the ungodly; 
as of Judas is written that the devil put it into his heart to 
betray Christ. And he not only instigated Cain to hate his 
brother Abel, but, moreover, to murder him. But the devil 
knows not the thoughts of the righteous, until they utter 
them. He knew not the thoughts of Christ's heart, nor 
knows he the thoughts of the godly, in whose heart Christ 
dwells. 'Tis a powerful, crafty, and subtle spirit. Christ 
names him the Prince of the World; he goes about shooting 
all thoughts, his fiery darts, into the hearts even of the 
godly, as discord, hatred to God, despair, blaspheming, &c. 
St. Paul well understood all these assaults, and bitterly com- 
plains of them. 

DXCVI. 

The apostle gives this title to the devil: " That he hath the 
power of death." And Christ calls him a murderer. He is 
so skilled, that he is able to cause death even with the leaf oi 
a tree; he has more boxes and pots full of poisons, where- 
with he destroys men, than all the apothecaries in the world 
have of heahng medicine; if one poison will not dispatch, an- 
other will. In a word, the power of the devil is greater than 
we can imagine; 'tis only God's finger can resist him. 

DXCVII. 

I maintain that Satan produces all the maladies which 
afflict mankind, for he is the prince of death. St. Peter 
speaks of Christ as healing all that are oppressed of the devil. 
He not only cured those who were possessed, but he restored 
sight to the bhnd, hearing to the deaf, speech to the dumb, 
strength to the paralytic; therefore I think all grave infirmities 
are blows and strokes of the devil, which he employs as an 
assassin uses the sword or other weapon. So God employs 
natural means to maintain the health and life of man, such 
as sleep, meat, drink, &c. The devil has other means or 
injury; he poisons the air, &c. 

A physician repairs the work of God when damaged cor- 
porally; we, divines, spiritually; we mend the soul that the devil 
has spoiled. The devil gives poison to kill men; a physician 
gives theriacum, oi some other drug, to save them; so the 



OF THE DEVIL AND HIS WORKS. 2.57 

creature, through creatures, helping creatures. Physic has not 
its descent and origin out of books, God revealed it; or, as 
Syrach says: " It cometh from the Most Highest; the Lord 
hath created medicines out of the earth." Therefore we 
may justly use corporal physic, as God's creature. Our 
burgomaster here at Wittenberg lately asked me, if it were 
against God's will to use physic? for, said he. Doctor Carlstad 
has preached, that whoso falls sick, shall use no physic, but 
commit his case to God, praying that His will be done. I 
asked him: did he eat when he was hungry? He answered, 
yes. Then, said I, even so you may use physic, which 
is God's creature, as well as meat and drink, or whatever else 
we use for the preservation of life. 



Satan plagues and torments people all manner of ways. 
Some he affrights in their sleep, with heavy dreams and 
visions, so that the whole body sweats in anguish of heart. 
Some he leads, sleeping, out of their beds and chambers up 
into high dangerous places, so that if, by the loving angels 
who are about them, they were not preserved, he would 
throw them down, and cause their death. The superstitious 
papists say, that these sleep-walkers are persons w^ho have 
never been baptized; or, if they have been, that the priest 
was drunk when he administered the sacrament. 



No creature can prevail against the devil, but only Christ; 
and he made trial of his art even upon him, as when he said 
unto him: " If thou wilt fall down and w^orship me, I will 
give thee all the kingdoms of the whole world." 

No man can rightly comprehend this temptation; I would 
willingly die, on condition I could fundamentally preach 
thereof. Doubtless, the devil moved Christ much when he 
said: " All this is mine, and I give it to whom I will;" for 
they are words of Divine Majesty, and belong cnly to God. 
True, the devil gives, but let us make a strong distinction 
between the real giver, who gives all that we have and 
are, and the dissembling murderer, who gives to those that 
serve and worship him for a short time, yet so that they 
must everlastingly perish. Christ contradicts him not, that he 



258 Luther's table-talk. 

is a lord and a prince of the world; but he will not therefore 
worship him, but says: Avoid, Satan. Even so ought we to 
do. He must be, indeed, a most wicked, poisoned, and thirsty 
spirit, that he durst presume to tempt the Son of God to fall 
down and worship him. The arch villain, doubtless, in the 
twinkling of an eye, laid before the Lord a delusion of all 
the kingdoms of the world, and their glory, as Luke writes, 
thereby to move and allure him, to the end he should think: 
such honour might one receive, and yet nevertheless be the 
child of God. 

DC. 

When that envious, poisoned spirit, the devil, plagues and 
torments us, as is his custom, by reason of our sins, intending 
thereby to lead us into despair, we must meet him in this 
manner: " thou deceitful and wicked spirit! how darest thou 
presume to persuade me to such things? Knowest thou not 
that Christ Jesus, my Lord and Saviour, who crushed th^ 
head, has forbidden me to believe thee, yea, even when thou 
speakest the truth, in that he names thee a murderer, a liar, 
and the father of lies. I do not admit to thee, that I, as thy 
captive, shall be condemned to everlasting death and hellish 
torments, by reason of my sins, as thou falsely suggestest; but 
thou thyself, on the contrary, long since, by Christ my Lord 
and Saviour, w^ert stripped, judged, and with everlasting 
bonds and chains of darkness, art bound, cast down, and deli- 
vered to hell, reserved to the judgment of the great day, and 
finally, with all the ungodly, shalt be thrown into the bottom- 
less pit of hell. Further, I demand of thee, by what autho- 
rity thou presuraest to exercise ^uch i)Ower and right against 
me? whereas thou hast given me neither life, wife, nor child; 
no, not the least thing that J have; neither art thou my lord, 
much less the creator of my body and soul; neither hast thou 
made the members wherewith I have sinned. Ho-\v, then, 
thou wicked and false spirit, art thou so insolent as to domi- 
neer over that which is mine, as if thou wert God himself." 

DCL 

The people who in Popedom are possessed of the devil, 
get not rid of him by such arts, -words, or gestures as their 
charmers use; the devil suifers not himself to be driven out 
with mere phrases, as: " Come out, tliou unclean spirit," for 



OF THE DEVIL" AND HIS WORKS. 259 

these charmers mean it not earnestly. The power of God must 
effect it. 

The devil may be driven out, either by the prayers of the 
whole church, when all Christians join their supplications 
together in a prayer so powerful, that it pierces the clouds, — 
or the person that would di'ive out the wicked enemy by him- 
self, must be of highly enlightened mind, and of strong and 
steadfast courage, certain of his cause; as Elijah, Elisha, Peter, 
Paul, &c. 

DCII. 

The cause that so many poor people in the time of Christ 
were possessed, was, that the true doctrine was almost sunk 
and quenched by the people of Israel, a few excepted, — as 
Zacharias, Elizabeth, Simeon, Anna, &c. And I believe if 
the Pharisees had continued to rule, and that Christ had not 
come, Judaism would have been turned into Paganism, — as, 
before the shining of the gospel, was seen in Popedom, where 
the people understood as little of Christ and his Word, as the 
Turks and heathens. 

DCIII. 

The devil well knew the Scripture, where it is said: " Be- 
hold, a virgin shall conceive and bear a child." Also: "Unto 
us a child is born." But because Christ has carried himself 
humbly and lowly, went about with public sinners, and by 
reason thereof was held in no esteem, — therefore the devil 
looked another way over Christ, and knew him not; for the 
devil looks a-squint upwards, after that which is high and 
pompous, not downwards, nor on that which is humble and 
lowly. But the everlasting, merciful God does quite the con- 
trary; he beholds that which is lowly, as the 118th Psalm 
shows: " Our God hath his dwelling on high, and yet hum- 
bleth to behold what is in heaven and on earth." And Isaiah: 
" I will look to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and 
trembleth at my word." God cares not for that which is 
high; yea, it is an abomination before him. St. Luke says: 
" That which is highly esteemed among men, is abomination 
in the sight of God." Therefore he that intends to climb 
high, let him beware of the devil, lest he throw him down; 
for the nature and manner of the devil is, first to hoist up 
ii.to heaven, and afterwards to cast down into hell. 

s2 



260 Luther's table-talk. 

DCIV. 

In cases of melancholy and sickness, I conclude it is merely 
the work of the devil. For God makes us not melancholy, 
nor affrights nor kills us, for he is a God of the living. 
Hence the Scripture: "Eejoice, and be of good comfort." 
God's Word and prayer is physic against spiritual tribulations. 

DCV. 

I would rather die through the devil, than through the em- 
peror or pope; for then I should die through a great and 
mighty prince of the world. But if he eat a bit of me 'twill 
be his bane; he shall spew me out again; and, at the day of 
judgment, I in requital will devour him. 

DCVI. 

The devil needs not to tell me I am not good or upright; 
neither would I wish to be so, that is, to be without feeling 
of my sins, or to think I need no remission of them; for, if 
that were the case, all the treasure of Christ were lost on me, 
seeing he says himself: "He came not for the sake of the 
just, but to call sinners to repentance." 

DCVII. 

I hold that a devil, once overcome with God's Word and 
Spirit, must be gone, and dare not return again with the 
same temptation; Christ says: " Avoid, Satan." And in ano- 
ther place: " Come out, thou unclean spirit." Then say the 
devils: " Suffer us to enter into the herd of swine." Origen 
says: " I believe that the saints strangle and slay many devils 
in combating" — that is, break their power. 



Witchcraft is the devil's own proper work, wherewith, 
when God permits, he not only hurts people, but often makes 
away with them ; for in this world we are as guests and 
strangers, body and soul cast under the devil; he is god of 
this world, and all things are under his power, w^hereby we 
are preserved in temporal life, — as meat, drink, air, &c. 

The devil is so crafty a spirit, thai he can ape and deceive 
our senses. He can cause one to think he sees something, 
which he sees not, that he hears thunder, or a trumpet, w^hich 



OF THE DEVIL AND HIS WORKS. 26l 

ht hears not. Like as the soldiers of Julius Caesar thought 
thiy heard the sound of a trumpet, as Suetonius writes, and 
yet there was no such thing. Oh, Satan is a master in aping 
and deceiving people, and every human sense. 

And especially, is he artful when he deceives people spi- 
ritually, bewitching and deceiving the hearts and consciences, 
in such sort that they hold and receive erroneous and un- 
godly doctrine and opinion, for the upright and divine truth. 

We see at this day how easy a matter it is for him so to do, 
by the sectaries and seducers; for he has so bewitched and 
deceived their hearts, that they hold that for tlie clear truth, 
which is altogether lies, errors, and abominable darkness. 
They hold themselves wise and learned in divine matters; 
other people they regard as geese, which neither see nor un- 
derstand anything. 

DCIX. 

The poisonous serpent takes such delight in doing mischief, 
that he not only deceives secure and proud spirits with his 
delusions, but also undertakes, through his deceptions, to 
bring into error those who are well instructed and grounded 
in God's Word. He vexes me often so powerfully, and 
assaults me so fiercely with heavy and melancholy thoughts, 
that I forget my loving Lord and Saviour Christ Jesus, or 
at least behold him far otherwise than he is to be beheld. 
There is none of us so free, but that often he is thus deceived 
and bewitched with false opinions. Therefore we should 
learn how to know this conjuror, to the end he may not 
come behind us, being sleepy and secure, and so delude us 
with his witchcraft. And truly, if he find us not sober and 
watching, and not armed with spiritual weapons, that is, with 
God's Word and with faith, then most surely he will over- 
come us. 



When I could not be rid of the devil with sentences out of 
the Holy Scripture, I made him often fly with jeering words; 
sometimes I said unto him: Saint Satan! if Christ's blood, 
which was shed for my sins, be not sufficient, then I desire 
that thou wouldst pray to God for me. When he finds me 
idle, with nothing in hand, he is very busy, and before I am 
aware, he wrings from me a bitter sweat: but when I offer 



262 LUTHER S TABLE-TALK. 

him the pointed spear, God's Word, he flies; yet, before he 
goes, makes a grievous hurricane. When I began to write 
against the pope, and the gospel was going on, the devil set 
himself strongly to work, rumbling and raging about, for he 
would wdllingly have preserved purgatory at Magdeburg. 
There was a citizen, whose child died, for whom he refused 
to have vigils and masses sung. The devil played his freaks, 
came every night, about twelve o'clock, into the chamber 
where the boy died, and made a whining like a young child. 
The good citizen being therewith full of sorrow, knew not 
what course to take. The popish priests said: O, now you 
see how it goes when vigils are not solemnized. Whereupon 
the citizen sent to me, desiring my advice, (for the sermon I 
had lately preached on this text: " They have Moses and the 
prophets," had been printed, and been read by him); and I 
wrote to him from Wittenberg, and advised him not to suffer 
any vigils at all to be held, for he might be fully assured that 
these were merely pranks of the devil; whereupon, the chil- 
dren and servants in the house jeered the devil, and said: 
What doest thou, Satan? Avoid, thou cursed spirit, get thee 
jione to the place where thou oughtest to be, to the pit of hell. 
When the devil marked their contempt, he left off his game, 
and came there no more. He is a proud spirit, and cannot 
endure scorn. 

DCXL 

Though Satan ceases not to plague the Christians, and to 
shoot at us his fiery darts, 'tis very good and profitable for 
us, for thereby he makes us the more sure of the word and 
doctrine, so that faith increases, and is stronger in us. We 
are often shaken, and, indeed, now and then the devil drives 
out of us a sour and bitter sw^eat, but he cannot bring us to 
despair; for Christ always has kept the field, and through us 
he will keep it still. Through hope, in all manner of trials 
and temptations, we hold ourselves on Christ. 

DCXIL 

'Tis a fearful thing when Satan torments the sorrowful 
conscience with melancholy; then the wricked villain, master- 
like, disguises himself in tlie person of Christ, so that it is 
impossible for a poor creature, whose conscience is troubled, 
to discover the knavery. Hence many of those, that neither 



OF THE DEVIL AND HIS WORKS. 263 

know nor understand the same, run headlong into despair, 
and make away with themselves; for they are blinded and 
deceived so powerfully by him, that they are fully persuaded 
it is not the devil, but Christ himself, that thus vexes and 
torments them. 

I am a doctor of Holy Scripture, and for many years have 
preached Christ; yet, to this day, I am not able to put Satan 
off, or to drive him away from me, as I would; neither am I 
able so to comprehend Christ and to take hold on him, as in 
Holy Scripture he is placed before me; but the devil con- 
tinually seeks hov/ to put another Christ into my mind. Yet, 
nevertheless, we ought to render humble thanks to Almighty 
God, who has hitherto preserved us by his holy Word, 
through faith and by prayer, so that we know how to walk 
before him in humility and fear, and not to depend or pre- 
sume on our own wisdom, righteousness, strength, and power, 
but to cheer and comfort ourselves in Christ, who is always 
more than sufficiently strong and powerful; and, although we 
be weak and faint, yet we continually vanquish and over- 
come through his power and strength in us poor, weak, and 
feeble creatures. For this may his holy name be blessed and 
maornified for evermore. Amen. 



The devil has two occupations, to which he applies himself 
incessantly, and which are the foundation stones of his king- 
dom — lying and murder. God says: " Thou shalt do no 
murder." " Thou shalt have none other gods but me. 
Against these two commandments, the devil, with all his 
force, fights without intermission. 

He now plays no more with people, as heretofore, by 
means of rumbling spirits, for he sees that the condition of 
the time is far otherwise than what it was twenty years past. 
He now begins at the right end, and uses great diligence. 
The rumbling spirits are mute among us; but the spirits of 
sedition increase above measure, and get the upper hand: 
God resist them. 

DCXIV. 

The power the devil exercises is not by God commanded, 
but God resists him not, suffering him to make tumults, yet 



264 Luther's table-talk. 

no longer or further than he wills, for God has set him a mark, 
beyond which he neither can nor dare step. 

When God said, concerning Job, to Satan: "Behold, he 
is in thy hands, yet spare his life," this power was by God 
permitted, as if God should say: I will so far permit and 
give thee leave, but touch not his life. 

DCXV. 

It is almost incredible how God enables us, weak flesh and 
blood, to enter combat with the devil, and to beat and overcome 
so powerful a spirit as he, and with no other weapon but 
only his Word, which by faith we take hold on. This must 
needs grieve and vex that great and powerful enemy. 

DCXVI. 

The devil is like a fowler; of the birds he catches, he wrings 
most of their necks, but keeps a few alive, to allure other birds 
to his snare, by singing the song he will have in a cage. I 
hope he will not get me into his cage. 

Dcxvn. 
Let not man flatter himself that the devil is in hell, far 
from the ungodly, as the archbishop of Mayence thinks; the 
devil dwells in his hard heart, and impels him according 
to his will and pleasure. For if the devil had no power but 
to plague us in body and goods, and vexed and tormented us 
only with the cares and troubles of this life, he were no devil 
to make account of. But he has learned a higher art; he 
takes away and falsifies the afticle of justification, ^Wra^e'ye et 
positive, and either tears the same quite out of our hearts, as 
in Popedom, or defiles it through sects and heresies, which 
hang thereon a gloss about works, or what not, leaving the 
husks of the nuts to the hearers, but the kernels are gone. 

DCXVIII. 

The devil has fwo manner of shapes or forms, wherein he 
disguises himself; he either appears in the shape of a ser- 
pent, to affright and kill; or else in the form of a silly sheep, 
to lie and deceive; these are his two court colours. The 
devil is a foolish spirit, ibr he gives means and occasion to 
Christ to defend himself, in that he plagues the poor and wake 
Christians; for thereby he confirms the authority of Christ 



OF THE DEVIL AND HIS WORKS. 265 

and his apostles; as when thej make the sick whole and sound, 
the devil had rather he had left them at peace and quiet, but 
his wicked desire to do mischief drives him forward, to the 
end he maj be brought to confusion. 

DCXIX. 

Our songs and psalms sorely vex and grieve the devil, 
whereas our passions and impatiences, our complainings and 
cryings, our "alas!" or "woe is me!" please him well, so 
that he laughs in his fist. He takes delight in tormenting us, 
especially when we confess, praise, preach, and laud Christ. 
For seeing the devil is a prince of this world, and our utter 
enemy, we must be content to let him pass through his coun- 
try: he will needs have imposts and customs of us, and strike 
our bodies with manifold plagues. 

DCXX. 

God gives to the devil and to witches power over human 
creatures in two ways; first, over the ungodly, when he will 
punish them by reason of their sins; secondly, over the just 
and godly, when he intends to try whether they will be con- 
stant in the faith, and remain in his obedience. Without 
God's will and our own consent, the devil cannot hurt us; 
for God says: " AYhoso touches you, toucheth the apple of 
mine eye." And Christ: " There cannot fall an hair from 
your head, without your heavenly Father's notice." 

DCXXI. 

The devil's power is not so well seen in the fall of carnal 
people, and of the wise of this world, who live like senseless 
creatures and heathen, as in the fall of the saints who were 
endued with the Holy Ghost; as Adam, David, Solomon, 
Peter, &c., who committed great sins, and fell by God's will, 
to the end they should not proudly exalt themselves by reason 
of God's gifts. 

DCXXII. 

By good experience, I know the devil's craft and subtilty, 
that he not only blows the law into us, to terrify and affright 
us, and out of mole-hills to make mountains, — that is, to 
make a very hell of what is but a small and little sin, 
which as a wondrous juggler he can perform artfully; but 



266 Luther's table-talk. 

also, can sometimes make such to be great and heavy sins 
which are no sins; for he brings one threatening sentence or 
other out of the Holy Scriptures, and before we are aware, 
gives so hard a blow to our hearts, in a moment, that we 
lose all light and sight, and take him to be the true Christ, 
whereas it is only the envious devil. 

DCXXIII. 

When tribulations approach, excommunicate them in the 
name of Christ Jesus, and say: God has forbidden me to re- 
ceive that coin, because it is minted by the devil; we reject it 
as prohibited. 

When heavy temptations come upon thee, expel them by 
what means thou best mayest ; talk with good friends, of such 
things as thou takest delight in. 

DCXXIV. 

When I write against the pope, I am not melancholy, for 
then I labour with the brains and understanding, then I 
write with joy of heart; so that not long since Dr. Reisen- 
pusch said to me : I much marvel you can be so merry; 
if the case were mine, it would go near to kill me. Where- 
upon I answered: Not the pope or all his shaven retinue can 
make me sad; for I know that they are Christ's enemies; 
therefore I fight against him with joyful courage. 

DCXXV. 

The devil gives heaven to people before they sin, but after 
they sin, brings their consciences into despair. Christ deals 
quite contrary, for he gives heaven after sins committed, and 
makes consciences joyful. 

Last night as I waked out of my sleep, the devil came and 
said: God is far from thee, and hears not thy prayers. Where- 
upon 1 said: Very well, I will call and cry the louder. I 
will place before my sight the world's unthankfulness, and 
the ungodly doings of kings, potentates, and princes; I will 
also think upon the raging heretics ; all these will inflame my 
praying. 

DCXXVI. 

The hound of hell, in Greek, is called Cerberus; in Hebrew, 
Scorphur: he has three throats — sin, the law, and death. 



OF THE DEVIL AND HIS WORKS 267 

DCXXVII. 

In Job are two chapters (xl. and xli.) concerning Behe- 
moth the whale, before whom no man is in safety. " Wilt 
thou (saitli the text) draw leviathan out with a hook? Will 
he make many supplications unto thee? will he speak soft 
words unto thee?'' These are images and figures whereby 
the devil is signified. 

DCXXVIII. 

At Mohlburg, in Thuringia, not far from Erfurt, tnere 
was a musician, who gained his living by playing at merry- 
makings. This man came to the minister of his parish, and 
complained that he was every day assailed by the devil, who 
threatened to carry him off, because he had played at an 
unlawful marriage. The minister consoled him, prayed for 
him, recited to him numerous passages of Scripture, directed 
against the devil; and, with some other pious men, watched 
over the unfortunate man, day and night, fastening the doors 
and windows, so that he might not be carried off. At length 
the musician said: "I feel that Satan cannot harm my soul, 
but he will assuredly remove my body;" and that very night, 
at eight o'clock, though the watch was doubled, the devil 
came in the shape of a furious wind, broke the windows, and 
carried off the musician, whose body was found next morn- 
ing, stiff and black, stuck on a nut-tree. 'Tis a most sure 
and certain story, added Luther. 

DCXXIX. 

We cannot expel damons with certain ceremonies and 
words, as Jesus Christ, the prophets, and the apostles did. 
All we can do, is in the name of Jesus Christ, to pray the 
Lord God, of his infinite mercy, to deliver the possessed 
persons. And if our prayer is offered up in full faith, we are 
assured by Christ himself (St. John xvi. 23), that it will be 
efficacious, and overcome all the devil's resistance. I might 
mention many instances of this. But we cannot of ourselves 
expel the evil spirits, nor must v/e even attempt it. 

DCXXX. 

Men are possessed by the devil two ways; corporally and 
spiritually. Those whom he possesses corporally, as mad 
people, he has permission from God to vex and agitate, but he 



26b Luther's table-talk. 

has no power over their souls. The impious, who persecute 
the divine doctrine, and treat the truth as a He, and who, 
unhappily, are very numerous in our time, these the devil 
possesses spiritually. They cannot be delivered, but remain, 
horrible to relate, his prisoners, as in the time of Jesus 
Christ were Annas, Caiaphas, and all the other impious 
Jews whom Jesus himself could not deliver, and as, no\v-a- 
days, are the pope, his cardinals, bishops, tyrants, and par- 
tisans. 

DCXXXI. 

When Satan says in thy heart; " God will not pardon thy 
sins, nor be gracious unto thee," I pray, how wilt thou then, 
as a poor sinner, raise up and comfort thyself, especially when 
other signs of God's wrath beat upon thee, as sickness, 
poverty, &c. And when thy heart begins to preach and say: 
behold, here thou liest in sickness; thou art poor and forsaken 
of every one: why, thou must turn thyself to the other side, and 
say: AVell, let it outwardly seem as it will, yea, though mine 
own heart felt infinitely more sorrow, yet I know for certain, 
that I am united and made one with my Lord and Saviour 
Christ; I hav^e his word to assure me of the same, which can 
neither fail nor deceive me, for God is true, and performs 
what he promises. 

DCXXXII. 

The devil often casts this into my breast: How if thy 
doctrine be false and erroneous, wherewith the pope, the 
mass, friars and nuns are thus dejected and startled? at 
which the sour sweat has drizzled from me. But at last, 
when I saw he Avould not leave, I gave him this answer: 
Avoid, Satan ; address thyself to my God, and talk with him 
about it, for the doctrine is not mine, but his; he has com- 
manded me to hearken unto this Christ. 



OF TEMPTATION AND TRIBULATION. 269 



OF TEMPTATION AND TEIBULATION. 

DCXXXIIl. 

AVhoso, without the word of grace and prayer, disputes 
with the devil touching sin and the law, will lose; therefore 
let him leave off betimes. For the devil is armed against us 
with Goliah's sword, with his spear and weapons; that is, he 
has on his side to assist him, the testimony of our own con- 
sciences, which witness against us in that we have trans- 
gressed all God's commandments; therefore the devil has a 
very great advantage against us. 

The devil often assaults me, by objecting, that out of my 
doctrine great offences and much evil have proceeded, and 
w^ith this he many a time vehemently perplexes me. And 
although I make him this answer: That much good is also 
raised thereby, which by God's grace is true, yet he is so 
nimble a spirit, and so crafty a rhetorician, that, master-like, 
he can pervert this into sin. He was never so fierce and full 
of rage as he is now. I feel him well. 

But when I remember myself, and take hold on the gospel, 
and meet him therewith, then I overcome him and confute 
all his arguments; yet for a time I often fail. He says: The 
law is also God's \Yord; why, then, is the gospel always 
objected against me? I say: True: the law is also God's 
Word; but it is as far different from the gospel, as heaven is 
from earth; for in the gospel, God offers unto us his grace; 
he wdll be our God merely out of love, and he presents unto 
us his only begotten Son, who delivers us from sin and death, 
and has purchased for us everlasting righteousness and life; 
thereon do I hold, and w^ill not make God a liar. God indeed 
has also given the law, but, in every respect, for another use 
and purpose. 

What I teach and preach, I teach openly, by clear day- 
light, not in a corner. I direct the same by the gospel, by 
baptism, and by the Lord's prayer. Here Christ stands, him 
I cannot deny; upon the gospel do I ground my cause, &c. 
Yet the devil, with his crafty disputing, brings it so near 
unto me, that the sweat of anguish drops from me. 

Thus was St. Paul constrained to defend himself at Phi- 



270 Luther's table talk> 

lippi, when both Jews and Gentiles hit him in the teeth, 
saying: *' That he troubled their city." And, at Thessalonica, 
saying: " These are they that turn the w^orld upside down; they 
do contrary to the decrees of Csesar." And at Csesarea, saying: 
" This is a pestilent fellow, that hath moved sedition among 
all the Jews throughout the world." So the devil stirred up 
the Jews against Christ, accusing him of rebellion, that he 
forbad to pay tribute unto Ca3sar, and that he blasphemed, in 
calling himself the Son of God. So I say to Satan: Like as 
thou camest to confusion by Christ and St. Paul, even so 
Mr. Devil, shall it go with thee, if thou meddlest with me. 

DCXXXIV. 

All heaviness of mind and melancholy come of the devil; 
especially these thoughts, that God is not gracious unto him: 
that God will have no mercy upon him, &c. Whosoever 
thou art, possessed v.-ith such heavy thoughts, know for cer- 
tain, that they are a work of the devil. God sent his Son into 
the world, not to affright, but to comfort. 

Therefore be of good courage, and think, that hencefor- 
ward thou art not the child of a human creature, but of God, 
through faith in Christ, in whose name thou art baptized; 
therefore the spear of death cannot enter into thee; he has 
no right unto thee, much less can he hurt or prejudice thee, 
for he is everlastingly sw^allowed up through Christ. 

DCXXXV. 

It IS better for a Christian to be sorrowful than secure, as 
the people of the world are. Well is it for him that stands 
always in fear, yet knows he has in heaven a gracious God, 
for Christ's sake; as the Psalm says: " The Lord's delight is 
in them that fear him, and put their trust in his mercy." 

There are two sorts of tribuhitions; one, of the spirit; ano- 
ther, of the flesh. Satan torments the conscience with lies, 
perverting that which is done uprightly, and according to 
God's Word; but the body, or flesh, he plagues in another 
kind. 

No man ought to lay a cross upon himself, or to adopt tri- 
bulation, as is done in Popedom; but if a cross or tribulation 
come upon him, then let him suffer it patiently, and know 
that it is good and profitable for him. 



OF TEMPTATION AND TRIBULATION. 271 

DCXXXVI. 

Luther being informed of one that was fiercely tempted 
and pkgued in his conscience, because he found not in him- 
self a complete righteousness, that he was not so righteous as 
God in tlie law required, and that, in praying, he always felt 
blaspheming against Christ, said: It is a good sign ; for 
blaspheming of God is two-fold; one activa, or operative, 
when one wilfully seeks occasion to blaspheme God; the 
other, a constrained blaspheming of God, passiva, when the 
devil, against our wills, possesses us with evil cogitations, 
which we desire to resist. With such, God will have us to 
be exercised, to the end we may not lie snoring in laziness, 
but strive and pray against them. By this means such things, 
in time, will vanish away and cease, especially at our last 
end; for then the Holy Ghost is present with his christians, 
stands by them, drives away the devil, and makes a sweet, 
quiet, and peaceable conscience. Wherefore, for his spiritual 
disease, let him take this my physic; that he trouble not him- 
self about anything, but be of good comfort, trust in God, 
and hold on to the AYord — the devil, of his own accord, will 
soon cease from stirring up such temptation. 

Concerning this tribulation, that he finds not a full and 
complete righteousness in himself, let him know, that no 
human creature finds it in this life; it is altogether angelical, 
which shall fall unto us in the life to come. Here we must 
content ourselves with Christ's righteousness, whicli he fully 
merited for us, with his innocent and spotless life. 

DCXXXVI I. 

Christ said to the adulteress: " Neither do I condemn thee, 
go, and sin no more.'* To the murderer, he said: "This 
day shalt thou be with me in Paradise." But to the Scribes 
and Pharisees, who set themselves against the righteousness 
of the gospel, Christ said: " Woe be unto you." 

When one out of weakness denies God's Word, as many 
at this time do> under prince George, it is no sin against the 
Holy Ghost. Peter sinned in denying Christ, but not against 
the Holy Ghost. On the contrary, Judas persisted in sinning; 
he repented not aright, but remained hardened. 



272 Luther's tarle-talk. 



DCXXXVIII. 



It is impossible for a human heart, without crosses and 
tribulations, to think upon God. 

DCXXXIX 

Not all can bear tribulations aliJie; some are better able to 
bear a blow of the devil; as we three, Philip Melancthon, 
John Calvin, and myself. 

DCXL. 

David, doubtless, had worse devils than we, for without 
great tribulations, he could not have had so great and glo- 
rious revelations. David made psalms: we also will make 
psalms, and sing as well as we can, to the honour of our Lord 
God, and to spite and mock the devil and his spouse. 

DCXLI. 

When David sang his song: " O my son Absalom, my son, 
my son Absalom, would God I had died for thee, O Absalom 
my son, my son," &c. Ah! how sorrowful and perplexed a 
man was he. The very words denote that his grief of heart 
was excessive. 

The good and holy king had vehement tribulations and 
crosses, which altogether eclipsed and darkened the promises 
made by God unto him. They were fearful and horrible 
examples. To hold fast and sure to the Word, in time oi 
such trials and vexations, as David did, Oh! this is of ines- 
timable value. 

DCXLII. 

The upright and true Christian church has to strive not 
only with flesh and blood, but with spiritual wickedness in high 
places. The spiritual combat is most heavy and dangerous; 
flesh and blood take away but only body, wife and children, 
house, land, and what is temporal; but the spiritual evil takes 
away the soul, everlasting life and salvation. 

DCXLIII. 

The Lord our God is a God of humble and perplexed 
hearts, who are in need, tribulation, and danger. If we were 
strong, we should be proud and haughty. God shows his 
power in our weakness; he will not quench the glimmering 
flax, neither will he break in pieces the bruised reed. 



OF TEMPTATION AND TRIBULATION. 273 

DCXLIV. 

Faith's tribulation is the greatest and sharpest torment, for 
faith must overcome all other tribulations; so that it faith be 
foiled, all other tribulations must needs fall upon human crea- 
tures; but if faith hold up her head, and be sound and in 
health, all other tribulations and vexations must grow sick, 
weak, and decrease. This tribulation of ftiith was that thorn 
which St. Paul felt, and which pierced thrcugh flesh and 
spirit, through soul and bodj. Such tribulations was David 
possessed with, when he made this psalm : " Lord, rebuke 
me not in thy anger." No doubt he would rather have been 
slain with a sword, than have suffered such wrath and indig 
nation from God. 

DCXLV. 

Heavy thoughts bring on physical maladies; when the soul 
is oppressed, so is the body. Augustin said well: Aiiima plus 
est ubi amat, quam ubi animat. When cares, heavy cogita- 
tions, sorrows, and passions superabound, they weaken the 
body, which, without the soul, is dead, or like a horse without 
a driver. But when the heart is at rest, and quiet, then it 
takes care of the body, and gives it what pertains thereunto. 
Therefore we ought to abandon and resist anxious thoughts, 
by all possible means. 

DCXLVI. 

The life of no human creature is without discontent; every } 
one has his tribulations, and many a one, rather than be 
without them, will procure disquietness to himself. No man 
is content with that which God gives him. 

DCXLVII. 

Ah ! how willingly would I now die, for I am fafnt and 
overwrought, and at this time I have a joyful and peaceable 
heart and conscience. I know full well, so soon as I shall be 
again in health, I neither shall have peace nor rest, but 
sorrow, weariness, and tribulations. But even that great 
man, St. Paul, could not be exempt from tribulations- 

DCXLVIII. 

When spiritual tribulations approach, we say: cursed be 
the day wherein I was born; and we begin to sweat. In such 
tribulations was our blessed Saviour Christ, in the garden, 

T 



274 Luther's table-talk. 

when he said: "Father, let this cup pass from me." Here 
the will was against the will, yet he turned himself presently 
according to his Father's will, and was comforted by an angel. 
Christ, who in our flesh was plagued and tempted, is the 
best mediator and advocate with God, in our tribulation. 
He is president, when we are only respondents, if we will 
but suffer him to mediate. Seems it God is angry with us 
when we are in tribulation and temptation, yet when we 
repent and believe, we shall find, that under such anger 
God's grace and goodness towards us lie hid. Therefore, let 
us patiently attend God's leisure, and constantly remain in 
hope. 

DCXLIX. 

On the 8th of August, 1525, Luther, with his wife, lay 
sick of a fever. Overwhelmed with dysentery, sciatica, and 
a dozen other maladies, he said: God has touched me sorely, 
and I have been impatient: but God knows better than we 
whereto it serves* Our Lord God is like a printer, who sets 
the letters backwards, so that here we must so read them; 
when we are printed off, yonder, in the life to come, we shall 
read all clear and straightforward. Meantime we must have 
patience. 

Tribulation is a right school and exercise of flesh and 
blood. The Psalms, almost in every verse, speak of nothing 
but tribulations, perplexities, sorrows, and troubles; they are 
a book of tribulations. 

DCL. 

Christ received the thief on the cross, and Paul, after so 
many blasphemings and prosecutions. We, then, have no 
cause at all to doubt. And, indeed, we must all in that way 
attain to salvation. Yet, though we have no cause to fear 
God's wrath, for old Adam's sake we must stand in fear; 
for we cannot take such hold on the grace and mercy of God 
as we ought. He had but only the first six words in the 
creed: " I believe in God the Father," yet these were far 
above his natural wisdom, reason, and understanding. 



The devil plagues and torments us in the place where we are 
most tender and weak. In Paradise, he fell not upon Adam, 
but upon Eve. It commonly rains where it was wet enough 
before. 



OF TEMPTATION AND TRIBULATION. 275 

When one is possessed with the doubt, that though he call 
upon the Lord he cannot be heard, and that God has turned 
his heart from him, and is angry, cogitations which we suffer, 
which are forced upon us, he must against them arm himself 
with God's Word, promising to hear him. As to the when 
and how God will hear him, this is stark naught; place, time, 
and person are accidental things; the substance and essence 
is the promise. 

DCLII. 

I have often need, in my tribulations, to talk even with a \ 
child, in order to expel such thoughts as the devil possesses \ 
me with; and this teaches me not to boast, as if of myself I 
were able to help myself, and to subsist w^ithout the strength 
of Christ. I need one, at times, to help me, who, in his 
whole body, has not so much divinity as I have in one 
finger. 

DCLIII. 

In this life are many different degrees of tribulations, as 
there are different persons. Had another had the tribulations 
which I have suffered, he would long since have died; while 
I could not have endured the buffetings which St. Paul did, 
nor St. Paul the tribulations which Christ suffered. The 
greatest and heaviest grief is, when one dies in the twinkling 
of an eye. But hereof we ought not to dispute, but to refer 
the same to God's judgment. 

DCLIV. 

When I am assailed with heavy tribulations, I rush out 
among my pigs, rather than remain alone by myself. The 
human heart is like a millstone in a mill; when you put 
wheat under it, it turns and grinds and bruises the wheat to 
flour; if you put no wheat, it still grinds on, but then 'tis 
itself it grinds and wears away. So the human heart, unless 
it be occupied with some employment, leaves space for the 
devil, who wriggles himself in, and brings with him a whole 
host of evil thoughts, temptations, and tribulations, which 
grind out the heart. 

DCLV. 

No papist among them will throw himself into the flames 
iur his doctrine, whereas our people readily encounter fire 

t2 



276 LUTHER S TABLE-TALK. 

and death, following therein the example of the holy martyrs, 
St. Agnes, St. Agaiha, St! Vincent, St. Lawrence, &c. We 
are sheep for the slaughter. Only the other day, they burned, 
at Paris, two nobles and two magistrates, victims in the 
cause of the gospel, the king himself (Francis I.), setting 
fire to the fao-gots. 

DCLVI. 

My tribulations are more necessary for me than meat and 
drink; and all they that feel them ought to accustom them- 
selves thereusto, and learn to bear them. If Satan had not 
so plagued and exercised me, I should not have been so great 
an enemy unto him, or have been able to do him such hurt. 
Tribulations keep us from pride, and therewith increase the 
acknowledgment of Christ and of God's gifts and benefits. 
For, from the time I began to be in tribulation, God gave me 
the victory of overcoming that confounded, cursed, and blas- 
phemous life wherein I lived in Popedom. God did the 
business in such a way, that neither the emperor nor the pope 
was able to suppress me, but the devil must come and set 
upon me, to the end God's strength may be known in my 
weakness. 

DCLVII. 

Our tribulations and doubts, wherewith the devil plagues 
us, can be driven away by no better means than by contemn- 
ing him; as when one contemns a fierce cur, in passing quietly 
by him, the dog then not only desists from biting, but also 
from barking; but when one enrages him by timorously 
throwing something at him, then he falls upon and bites him. 
Even so, when the devil sees that we fear hiin, he ceases not 
to torment and plague us. 

PCLVIII. 

A woman at Eisenach lay very sick, having endured hor- 
rible paroxysms, which no physician was able to cure, for it 
was directly a work of the devil. She had had swoonings, 
and four paroxysms, each lasting three or four hours. Her 
hands and feet bent in the form of a horn ; she w^as chill and 
cold; her tongue rough and dry; her body much swollen. 
She seeing Luther, who came to visit her, was much rejoiced 
thereat, raised herself up, and said: Ah! my loving father in 
Christ, I have a heavy burthen upon me, pray to God for 



OF TEMPTATION AND TRIBULATION. 277 

me; and so fell down in her bed again. Whereupon Luther 
sighed, and said: "God rebuke thee, Satan, and command 
thee that thou suffer this, his divine creature, to be at peace." 
Then turning himself towards the standers by, he said: " She 
is plagued of the devil in the body, but the soul is safe, and 
shall be preserved; therefore let us give thanks to God, and 
pray for her;" and so they all prayed aloud the Lord's prayer. 
After which, Luther concluded with these words: "Lord 
God, heavenly Father I who hast commanded us to pray for 
the sick, we beseech thee, through Jesus Christ, thy only be- 
loved Son, that thou wouldst deliver this thy servant from 
her sickness, and from the hands of the devil. Spare, O Lord, 
her soul, which, together with her body, thou hast purchased 
and redeemed from the power of sin, of death, and of the 
devil." Whereupon the sick woman said: '* Amen." The 
night following she took rest, and the next day was graciously 
delivered from her disease and sickness. 



A letter, written by Luther to Doctor Beneaict Paul, whose 
son had lately been killed by a fall from the top of a house: — 
" Although it be nowhere forbidden in Holy Scripture to 
mourn and grieve for the death of a godly child or friend — 
nay, we have many examples of the godly, who have bewailed 
the death of their children and friends — yet there ought to 
be a measure in sorrowing and mourning. Therefore, loving 
doctor, while you do well to mourn and lament the death of 
your son, let not your grief exceed the measure of a Chris- 
tian, in refusing to be comforted. I would have you, first, 
consider 'twas God gave that son unto you, and took him from 
you again; secondly, I would wish you to follow the example 
of that just and godly man. Job, who, w^hen he had lost all 
his children, all his wealth and substance, said: 'Have we 
received good at the hand of the Lord, and shall we not re- 
ceive evil? The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away, 
blessed be the name of the Lord,' &c. He rightly considered 
that both good and evil come of the Lord; even so do you 
likewise; then you shall see that you have much greater gifts 
and benefits left of God to you than the evil you now leek 
But you look now only upon the evil that your son is dead; 
and, meantime, you forget the glorious treasure God has 



278 Luther's table-talk 

given you, in the true knowledge of his word, a good and 
peaceable conscience, which alone should overw^eigh all evil 
which may happen unto you; why, then, do you plague and 
torment yourself with the death of your son? But, admit 
the loss a great and heavy one, 'tis no new thing; you are 
not alone therein, but have companions who have had like 
misfortunes. Abraham had much more sorrow of heart, con- 
cerning his son, while he was yet living, than if he had been 
dead. How think ye was it with him in his heart, w4ien, with 
his naked sword, he was to strike otf the head of his son? 
How was it also, think you, with Jacob, when he was in- 
formed that his loved son Joseph was torn in pieces by wild 
beasts? Or what father was ever perplexed and troubled 
in heart like David, when by his son Absalom he was perse- 
cuted and driven out of his kingdom, and when that son, in 
a state of rebellion, was slain and damned? Doubtless, Da- 
vid's heart at that time, with great grief, might have melted. 
Therefore, when you rightly behold and consider these and 
like examples of such high, enlightened people, you ought to 
feel that this your sorrow of heart is nothing comparable with 
theirs. Therefore know, loving brother, that God's mercy is 
greater than our tribulations. You have, indeed, cause to 
mourn, as you think, but it is nothing else than sugar mingled 
with vinegar; your son is very well provided for; he lives 
now with Christ; oh! would to God that I, too, had finished 
my course; I would not wish myself here again. Your suf- 
fering is only a corporal cross. You are a good logician and 
teach others that art; make use thereof yourself now; put it 
in practice; define, divide, conclude, distinguish that which 
is spiritual, and separate it from that which is corporal." 

DCLX. 

When Satan will not leave off tempting thee, then bear 
with patience, hold on hand and foot, nor faint, as if there 
would be no end thereof, but stand courageously, and attend 
God's leisure, knowing that what the devil cannot accomplish 
by his sudden and powerful assaults, he thinks to gain by craft, 
by persevering to vex and tempt thee, thereby to make thee 
faint and weary, as in the Psalm is noted: "Many a time 
have they afflicted me from my youth up; yet they have not 
prevailed against me," &c. But be fully assured, that in this 



OF TEMPTATION AND TRIBULATION. 279 

sport with the devil, God, with all his holy angels, takes de- 
light and joy; and assure thyself, also, that the end thereof 
will be blessed and happy, which thou shalt certainly find to 
thy everlasting comfort. 

DCLXI. 

Concerning predestination, it is best to begin below, at 
Christ, as then we both hear and find the Father; for all 
those that have begun at the top have broken their necks. 1 
have been thoroughly plagued and tormented with such cogi- 
tations of predestination; I would needs know how God in- 
tended to deal with me, &c. But at last, God be praised! I 
clean left them; I took hold again on God's revealed word; 
higher I was not able to'bring it, for a human creature can 
never search out the celestial will of God; this God hides, 
for the sake of the devil, to the end the crafty spirit may be 
deceived and put to confusion. The revealed will of God the 
devil has learned from us, but God reserves his secret will to 
himself. It is sufficient for us to learn and know Christ in 
his humanity, in which the Father has revealed himself. 

DCLXII. 

Christ, on the tenth day, came again into Jerusalem, and 
on the fourteenth day he was killed. His cogitations and 
tribulations then were concerning the sins of the whole world, 
concerning God's wrath and death, of which all ought to 
stand in fear. But before he was thus personally made sin 
for us, he was a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief; 
his tribulations were concerning his labour and pains, which 
he knew would be spent in vain upon his own nation, the 
Jews, and over which he wept bitterly, because they knew 
not the time of their visitation. 

DCLXIII. 

More and greater sins are committed when people are alone 
than when they are in society. When Eve, in paradise, 
walked by herself, the devil deceived her. In solitary places 
are committed murders, robberies, adulteries, &c.; for in soli- 
tude the devil has place and occasion to mislead people. But 
whosoever is in honest company is ashamed to sin, or at least 
has no opportunity for it; and moreover, our Saviour Christ 



280 LUTHER S TABLE-TALK. 

promised: "Where two or three be gathered together in my 
name, there will I be in the midst of them." 

When king David was idle and alone, and went not out to 
the wars, then he fell into adultery and murder. I myself 
have found that I never fell into more sin than when I was 
alone. God has created mankind for fellowship, and not for 
solitariness, which is clearly proved by this strong argument: 
God, in the creation of the world, created man and woman, 
to the end that the man in the woman should have a f'iUow 

DCLXIV. 

We find in no history any human creature oppressed with 
such sorrow as to sweat blood, therefore this history of Christ 
is wonderful; no man can understand or conceive what his 
bloody sweat is. And it is more wonderful, that the Lord of 
grace and of wrath, of life and of death, should be so weak, 
and made so sorrowful, as to be constrained to seek for solace 
and comfort of poor and miserable sinners, and to say: Ah, 
loving disciples! sleep not, wake yet a little, and talk one with 
another, that at least I may hear some people are about me. 
Here the Psalm was rightly applied, which says: " Thou hast 
made him a little lower than the angels," &c. Ah, that 
bloody sweat was pressed out of our blessed, sweet Savioui 
Christ Jesus, through the immeasurable heavy burden which 
lay on his innocent back; namely, the sins of the universal 
world, against which, doubtless, he prayed: " Lord, rebuke 
me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy hot dis- 
pleasm-e." 



OF LUTHER'S ADVERSARIES 

DCLXV. 

Such fellows as Tetzel, Cochl^eus, Lemnius, I nothing regard. 
We should have no dealing with such backbiters and slanderers, 
they are most detestable; they appear not openly in the field, 
nor come right in our sight, but, in their poisoned hatred, 
scorn everything we do. They boast highly of the Fathers; 
let them: we have one Father, which is in heaven, who is 
above all fathers; their piece and patchwork is of no weight. 



OF luthee's adversaries. 281 

They write under the inspiration of a corrupt and vicious 
heart, and we all know that their works are mere impudent 
lies. The article of the Holy Trinity is nowhere written 
expressly in Holy Scripture, yet it is believed; therefore, they 
say, we ought also to believe traditions and ordinances of men 
without God's Word. 

DCLXVI. 

This Wetzell they have preferred at Leipzig, is a mis- 
chievous fellow. He was condemned to die, and would have 
been executed, but was saved at my intercession, and honour- 
ably entertained; now he requites me by his insolences. 
However, 'tis a wretch that has condemned himself; he is 
not worthy to be answered; he will have his judge. The 
papists will gain nothing by their railing. When they blas- 
pheme, we should pray, and be silent, and not carry wood to 
the fire. 

I am glad this fellow is at Leipzig; he is there like a mouse 
taken in a trap, for he is full of evil opinions; when they 
break out, he will get his payment. He got much poison from 
Campanus, who wrote a blasphemous book under this title: 
Against all that were and are in the world since the apostles' 
time. He has lost the general praise. He is reserved in his 
preachings; and cold, colder than ice. He dares not break 
out and say what he has in his heart; he goes like a shackled 
hare; he fears his hearers; his mouth is shut, his words cap- 
tive, as in a dungeon. The words of an eloquent man 
should move others, and pierce the heart. But they that 
teach nothing uprightly or purely, are but half-learned; dunce- 
like, bold, and presumptuous; as Carlstad is with his Touto, 
out of which he made Autos. 

DCLXVII. 

The emperor Sigismund was, as it were, made captive by 
the papists. They made him do what they pleased; to wear 
a deacon's coat, and, at Christmas, to read the gospel to the 
pope; so that every emperor is now said to be a deacon of 
the Romish church, the pope's mass-servant. The emperor, 
after he performed this ceremony, had never any success 
against the Turks or in Germany. The kingdom of Bohemia 
is fallen, which before was a very fair kingdom. 



282 Luther's table-talk. 

dclxviii. 

Latomus was tlie best among all my adversaries: his point 
was this: " What is received of the church, ought not to be 
rejected." As the Jews said: " We are God's people;" so the 
papists cry: " The church cannot err." This was the argu- 
ment against which the prophets and apostles fought; Moses 
says: " They moved me to jealousy with that which was not 
God, and I will provoke them to anger with a foolish nation." 
And St. Paul: " That he is a Jew which is one inwardly;" and 
Isaiah: "In him shall the Gentiles trust." 

" It is impossible," say they, " that God should forsake his 
church, for he declares, ' I am with you always, unto the end 
of the world,' " &c. The question is, to whom do these words: 
with you, refer? which is the true church whereof Christ 
spake? The perplexed, broken and contrite in heart, or the 
Romish courtesans and knaves. 

DCLXIX. 

Philip Melancthon showing Luther a letter from Augsburg, 
wherein he was informed, that a very learned divine, a papist 
in that city, was converted, and had received the gospel, 
Luther said: I like those best that do not fall off suddenly, 
but ponder the case with considerate discretion, compare to- 
gether the writings and arguments of both parties, and lay 
them on the gold balance, and in God's fear search after the 
upright truth; out of such, fit people are made, able to stand 
in controversy. Such a man was St. Paul, who at first was 
a strict Pharisee and man of works, who stifily and earnestly 
held over and defended the law; but afterwards preached 
Christ in the best and purest manner against the whole nation 
of the Jews. 

DCLXX. 

That impious knave, Martin Cellarius, thought to flatter 
me by saying: " Thy calling is superior to that of the apostles;" 
but I at once checked him, replying sharply: " By no means; 
I am in no degree comparable with the apostles." He sent 
me four treatises he had written, about Moses' temple, and 
the allegories it involved; but I returned them at once, for 
they were full of the most arrogant self-glorification. 



OF Luther's adversaries. 283 

DCLXXI. 

Erasmus of Rotterdam is the vilest miscreant that ever 
disgraced the earth. He made several attempts to draw me 
into his snares, and I should have been in danger, but that 
God lent me special aid. In 1525, he sent one of his doctors, 
with l!00 Hungarian ducats, as a present to my wife; but I 
refused to accept them, and enjoined my wife to meddle not 
in these matters. He is a very Caiphas. 

" Qui Satanam iion odit, amet tua carmina Erasme, 
Atque idem jungiit furias tt miilgeat orcum." 

DCLXXII. 

Erasmus is very pitiful with his prefaces, though he tries to 
smooth them over; he appears to see no difference between 
Jesus Christ our Saviour, and the wise pagan legislator 
Solon. He sneers at St. Paul and St. John; and ventures 
to say, that the Epistle to the Romans, whatever it might 
have been at a former period, is not applicable to the present 
state of things. Shame upon thee, accursed wretch! 'Tis a 
mere Momus, making his mows and mocks at everything and 
everybody, at God and man, at papist and protestant, but all 
the while using such shuffling and double-meaning terms, 
that no one can lay hold of him to any effectual purpose. 
Whenever I pray, I pray for a curse upon Erasmus. 

DCLXXIII. 

Carlstad opposed me merely out of ambition, for he flat- 
tered himself that on earth was not a more learned man than 
he. And although in his writings he imitated me, yet he played 
strange tricks with my manner. He wanted to be the great 
man, and truly I would willingly have left the honour to 
him, so far as it had not been against God. For, I praise 
my God, I was never so presumptuous as to think myself 
wiser than another man. "When at first I wrote against 
indulgences, I designed simply to have opposed them, think- 
ing that, afterwards, others would come and accomplish what 
I had begun. 

DCLXXIV. 

We ought utterly to contemn and reject Campanus, and 
not to esteem him worthy of an answer, for thereby he 



284 LUTHER*S TABLE-TALK. 

becomes more audacious and insolent. Let us despise him, 
so will he soonest be smothered and suppressed. 



Luther being informed that the preaching of James 
Schenck was everywhere extolled, said: O! how acceptable 
to me would these reports be, if with his preaching he 
brought not in such sweet-mouthed, smooth, and stately 
words, of which St. Paul complains to the Romans, whereby 
hearers are deceived. They are like the wind Cecias, which 
blows so mild and still, so soft and warm, that the blossoms 
of trees, and other herbs and flowers, are enticed to spring 
forth to their destruction. Even so the devil, when he 
preaches Christ in his ministers, intends to destroy Christ; 
and although he speak the truth, yet even therewith he lies. 
An honest man may well go up the stairs when a knave 
lies hid behind them; for the devil can well endure that 
Christ sit upon the tongue, meantime he himself lies hid 
under it, so that the people are tickled and inflamed with 
what they hear; but such smooth tattliniz- lasts not long; for 
Satan, through the gospel, will pervert the gospel, because 
presumptuous and secure spirits acknowledge not their sins. 
And where there is no tinder to make it catch, there Christ 
has no room or place wherein he may work ; for he is come only 
to them that are of perplexed, broken hearts and spirits. But 
these contemners of the law are haughty and proud spirits, 
just as the people in Popedom, under the tradition of the law, 
were far from observing the law, that being altogether 
strange to them. Therefore the preaching of the law is a 
preparation for the gospel, and gives matter for Christ to 
work upon, who is the only work-master of faith. 

DCLXXVI. 

On the 15th of April, 1539, certain positions, printed at 
Leipzig, were sent to Luther, wherein John Hammer subtly 
maintained that the law concerned the Christians nothing at 
all; he also divided repentance into three parts, and said: 
The Jews had one kind of repentance, the Gentiles another 
kind, and the Christians a third. Whereupon Luther said: 
Who could have ever thought such extravagant spirits 
should come? 'Tis an uti^ and mischievous error, to distin- 



OF i.ltiier's adversaries. 285 

guish repentance according to persons, whereas there is only 
one Kind of repentance given to all mankind, seeing that all, 
one as well as another, have angered and oifended one only 
God, whether Jews, Gentiles, or Christians. 'Tis as gross, 
abominable, and manifest error, as it were to say that men 
have another kind of repentance than women have; princes 
than subjects; masters than servants; rich than poor — 
making God to be a respecter of persons: as though the 
l)rophets had not taught uprightly of repentance, and as 
though the repentance of the Ninevites was not upright and 
true; whence, at last, would follow, that if we preached not 
repentance out of the law, Christ was not under the law, 
whereas he was, for our sakes, under the curse of the law. 

DCLXXVll. 

On the 1 3th of September, 1538, a warm disputation was 
held, nearly five hours long, in which Luther powerfully 
inveighed against innovators, telling them that they would 
destroy the gospel, and abolish the law, and would bring to 
evil those minds which were too secure. He said he would 
I'esist them to his last breath, did it cost him his life. In the 
(evening, he discoursed of the heresy of Arius; when that 
innovator began to preach his doctrine, Peter, patriarch of 
Alexandria, denounced it as erroneous, and against Christ's 
honour, seeing that he who denies the divinity of Christ, 
certainly deprives him of his honour. Arius began by 
denying that Christ was God, affirming that he was only a 
creature, though a perfect creature. But when the godly 
bishops resisted him, he said, secondly, that Christ, the most 
perfect of creatures, yea, above the angels, had made all other 
creatures. Thirdly, he alleged that Christ was God, emana- 
ting from God, as light from light; and he taught so subtly, 
that many people joined him, and shared his opinions. The 
pious bishop of Milan, Auxentius, against whom Hilary 
wrote an epistle, fell into his errors. 

Arius finished by saying, that Christ was not born of the 
Father, equal God, but was of one substance with the Father, 
and would not give up this assertion as to his creation. Then 
began the strife about the word Homousion, which was 
inserted in the Athanasian creed, but which is nowhere 
written in the Holy Scripture, that he was born of the 



286 LUTHETl's TABLE-TALK. 

Father, yet it was pertinent, and in respect to his human 
nature rightly spoken. 

The heresies of Arius continued very long, above three 
hundred years. They were in highest flourish under Con- 
stantine; under Domitian they tyrannized; under Jovian, 
Valentinian, and Gratian, they somewhat decreased. They 
lasted the time of seven emperors, until the Goths came. 
The great Turk, to this day, is an Arian. We thus see that 
there is no heresy, no error, no idolatry, however gross, 
which does not obtain partisans and supporters. 'Tis mani- 
fest, in the present day, at Rome, where the pope is honoured 
as a God. 

DCLXXVIII. 

Philip Melancthon has a good conscience, and therefore 
takes matters to heart. Christ well and thoroughly exercised 
our forefathers; he who belongs to Christ must feel the 
serpent's sting in the heel. No doubt the mother of our 
Lord was a poor maid, for she was betrothed to a carpenter, 
also poor. 

Let us then be merry and contented in poverty and trouble, 
and remember that we have a rich master, who will not leave 
us without help and comfort; in so doing, we shall have peace- 
ful consciences, let it go with us as God please. The un- 
godly want this peace in their hearts; as Isaiah says: " They 
are as the waves of the sea; neither have the covetous usurers 
any peace of conscience." 

DCLXXIX. 

Erasmus was poisoned at Rome and at Venice with epicu- 
rean doctrines. He extols the Arians more highly than the 
Papists; he ventured to say that Christ is named God but 
once in St. John, where Thomas says: " My Lord and my 
God." His chief doctrine is, we must carry ourselves accord- 
ing to the time, or, as the proverb goes, hang the cloak 
according to the wind; he only looked to himself, to have 
good and easy days, and so died like an epicurean, without 
any one comfort of God. 

DCLXXX. 

This do I leave behind me as my will and testament, 
whereunto I make you witnesses. I hold Erasmus of Rotter- 



OF Luther's a^dversaries. 287 

dam to be Christ's most bitter enemy. In his catechism, 
of all his writings that which I can least endure, he teaches 
nothing decided; not one word says: Do this, or, do not this; 
he only therein throws error and despair into youthful con- 
sciences. He wrote a book against me, called Hi/peraspites, 
wherein he proposed to defend his work on free-will, against 
which I wrote my De servo Arbitrio, which has never yet 
been confuted, nor will it ever be by Erasmus, for I am 
certain that what I wrote on the matter is the unchangeable 
truth of God. If God live in heaven, Erasmus will one day 
know and feel what he has done. 

Erasmus is the enemy to true religion, the open adversary 
of Christ, the complete and faithful picture and image of 
Epicurus and of Lucian. 

DCLXXXI. 

I care not at all for an open enemy of the church, such 
as the papists with their power and persecutions; I regard 
them not, for by them the true church cannot receive 
liurt, nor can they hinder God's "Word; nay, the churcli, 
through their raging and persecution, rather increases. 
But it is the inward evil of false brethren that wil] do 
mischief to the church. Judas betrayed Christ; the false 
apostles confused and falsified the gospel. Such are the 
real fellows through whom the devil rages and spoils the 
church. 

DCLXXXII. 

I know not well how to render the word hypocrita. Mere 
hypocrite, as we commonly accept it, is too mild and soft a 
name for a false brother ; it should convey almost as much as 
sycophanta, a wicked villain, who for his own private gain 
does mischief to otliers. Such hypocrites were the servants 
of king Saul, who, for the sake of their bellies, spake against 
righteous David, backbiting him in the king's presence, 
whereby the land was stained. Hypocrita is not only a 
hypocrite or a flatterer that pretends love towards one and 
speaks that which tickles the ears, but one that produces 
mischief under colour of holiness, as the examples in the 
twenty -third of Matthew clearly show. St. Jerome says: 
Feigned holiness is a double evil. 



288 luther's table-talk. 

dclxxxiti. 
The greatest and fiercest strife that Christians have, is 
with false brethren. If a false brother would openly say: I 
am a Pilate, a Herod, an Annas, that is, if he would put off 
the name of a believing Christian, and profess himself an open 
enemy to Christ, then we would patiently endure all the evil 
he could work upon us. But that such should bear the name 
of Christians, we cannot and will not endure; this rule and 
government over the conscience, we divines take properly 
unto us, and say: It is ours through the Word, we will not 
suffer ourselves to be bereaved of it, by any means. 

DCLXXXIV. 

We have hooted away the friars and priests, by the preach- 
ing of the gospel, and now the false brethren plague us. 
Truly 'tis a right sentence: " He came unto his own, and his 
own received him not." 

DCLXXXV. 

I marvel that nothing is written of the villany Judas did 
to Christ. I am persuaded he did it for the most part with 
the tongue; for Christ, not in vain, complains of him in the 
41st Psalm. Doubtless he went to the high priests and 
elders, and spake grievously against Christ, saying: I bap- 
tize also, but now I see, 'tis frivolous and nothing worth. 
Moreover, he w^as a thief; he thought to make great gain in 
betraying Christ (as AVetzell and others think by our means 
to be made great lords); he was a wicked, desperate villain, 
or Christ would have forgiven him, as he forgave Peter. 
But Peter fell out of weakness; Judas out of wickedness. 

DCLXXXVI. 

Judas was as necessary among the apostles as any three 
of them. For he confuted many arguments of the heretics, 
who alleged that no man can baptize, but he that has the 
Holy Ghost. What he did in his oflSce was good and right, 
but when he played the thief, he did wrong and sinned. 
Therefore we must separate and distinguish his person from 
his office; for Christ commanded him not to steal, but to 
execute his office, to preach, to baptize, &c. Judas likewise 
confuted what some object to us, who say: There are 
among you protestants, many wricked wretches, false brethren, 
and unchristian-like offenders. Herein comes Judas and says: 



OF OFFENCES. 289 

I was also an apostle, I behaved and carried myself, as an 
understanding worldly-wise companion and politician, much 
better than the others, my fellow^ apostles; no man thought 
that such mischief was hid in me. Judas at the Lord's 
Supper, was directly the pope, who also has got hold of the 
purse, is a covetous wretch, a thief, and belly-god, who will 
also speak in praise of Christ: in truth, 'tis a right Iscariot. 



OF OFFENCES. 

DCLXXXVII. 

When we read that Judas hanged himself, that his belly 
burst in pieces, and that his bowels fell out, we may take this 
as a sample how it will go with all Christ's enemies. The 
Jews ought to have made a mirror of Judas, and have i^^eer.. 
therein how they in like manner should be destroyed. An 
allegory or mystery herein lies hid, for the belly signifies the 
whole kingdom of the Jews, which shall also fall away and 
be destroyed, so that nothing thereof shall remain. When we 
read that the bowels fell out, this shows that the posterity of 
the Jews, their whole generation, shall be spoiled and go to 
the ground. 

DCLXXXVIII. 

I may compare the state of a Christian to a goose, tied up 
over a wolf's pit to catch wolves. About the pit stand many 
ravening wolves, that would willingly devour the goose, but 
she is preserved alive, while they, leaping at her, fall into the 
pit, are taken and destroyed. Even so, w^e that are Chris- 
tians are preserved by the sweet loving angels, so that fhe 
devils, those ravening wolves, the tyrants and persecutors, 
cannot destroy us. 

DCLXXXIX. 

We little know how good and necessary it is for us to have 
adversaries, and for heretics to hold up their heads against 
us. For if Cerinthus had not been, then St. John the Evan- 
gelist had not written his gospel; but when Cerinthus op- 
posed the godhead in our Lord Christ, John was constrained 
to wTite and say: In the beginning was the Word; making 
the distinction of the three persons so clear, that nothino" 

u 



290 lcther's table-talk. 

could be clearer. So when I began to write against indul 
gences and against the pope, Dr. Eck set upon me, and aroused 
me out of my drowsiness. I wish from my heart this man 
might be turned the right way, and be converted; for that I 
would give one of my fingers; but if he will remain where 
he is, I wish he were made pope, for he has well deserved it, 
for hitherto he has had upon him the whole burthen of Pope- 
dom, in disputing and writing against me. Besides him, 
they have none that dare fall upon me; he raised my first 
cogitations against the pope, and brought me so far, or other- 
wise I never should have gone on. 

DCXC. 

A liar is far worse, and does greater mischief, than a mur- 
derer on the highway; for a liar and false teacher deceives 
people, seduces souls, and destroys them under the colour of 
U^od's Word; such a liar and murderer was Judas, like his 
lather the devil. It was a marvel how Judas should sit at 
the table with Christ, and not blush for shame, when Christ 
said: " One of you shall betray me," &c. The other disciples 
had not the least thought that Judas would betray Christ; 
each was rather afraid of himself, thinking Christ meant him; 
for Christ trusted Judas with the purse, and the whole man- 
agement of the house-keeping, whence he was held in great 
repute by the apostles. 

DCXCI. 

A scorpion thinks when his head lies hid under a leaf, that 
he cannot be seen; even so the hypocrites and false saints 
think, when they have hoisted up one or two good works, 
that all their sins therewith are covered and hid. 

DCXCII. 

False Christians that boast of the gospel, and yet bring no 
good fruits, are like the clouds without rain, wherewith the 
whole element is overshadowed, gloomy and dark, and yet 
no rain falls to fructify the ground: even so, many Chris- 
tians affect great sanctity and holiness, but they have neither 
faith nor love towards Gk)d, nor love towards their neigh- 
bour. 

DCXCIII. 

Job says: " The life of a human creature is a w^arfare upon 
earth." A human creature, especially a Christian, must be 



OF OFFENCES. 291 

a soldier, ever striving and fighting with the enemy. And 
St. Paul describes the armour of a Christian, Ephes. vi., 
thus: — 

First — The girdle of truth; that is, the confession of the 
pure doctrine of the gospel, an upright, not a hypocritical or 
feigned faith. 

Secondly — The breast-plate of righteousness, by which is 
not meant the righteousness of a good conscience, although 
this be also needful: for it is written, '* Enter not into judg- 
ment with thy servant," &c; and St. Paul: "Iknow nothing 
of myself, yet I am not thereby justified," but the righteous- 
ness of faith, and of the remission of sins, which Paul means 
in that place, touching which Moses spake. Gen. xv.: " Abra- 
ham beheved God, and that was imputed unto him for 
righteousness." 

Thirdly — The shoes wherewith the feet are shod; viz. the 
works of the vocation, whereby we ought to remain, and not 
to go further, or to break out beyond the appointed mark. 

Fourthly — The shield of faith; similar to this is the fable 
of Perseus w^ith the head of Gorgon, upon which whoso 
looked died immediately; as Perseus held and threw Gorgon's 
head before his enemies, and thereby got the victory, even so 
a Christian must likewise hold and cast the Son of God, as 
Gorgon's head, before all the evil instigations and crafts of 
the devil, and then most certainly he shall prevail and get the 
victory. 

Fifthly — The helmet of salvation; that is, the hope ol 
everlasting life. The weapon wherewith a Christian fights 
the enemy is: " The sword of the spirit," 1 Thess. v., that is, 
God's word and prayer; for as the lion is frightened at nothing 
more than at the crowing of a cock, so the devil can be over- 
come and vanquished with nothing else than with God's 
word and prayer; of this Christ himself' has given us an 
example. 

DCXCIV. 

Our life is like the sailing of a ship; as the mariners in the 
ship have before them a haven towards which they direct 
their course, and where they will be secure from all danger, 
even so the promise of everlasting life is made unto us, that 
we therein, as in a safe haven, may rest calm and secure. 
But seeing our ship is weak, and the winds and waves beat 

u2 



292 luther's table-talk. 

upon us, as though they would overwhelm us, therefore we 
have need of a good and experienced pilot, who with his 
counsel and advice may rule and govern the vessel, that it 
run not on a rock, or utterly sink and go down. Such a 
pilot is our blessed Saviour Christ Jesus. 

DCXCV. 

Ingratitude is a very irksome thing, which no human 
creature can tolerate; yet our Lord God can endure it. If 
I had had to do with the Jews, patience would have failed me; 
I had never been able so long to endure their stubbornness. 
The prophets were always poor, contemned people; plagued 
and persecuted not only by outward and open, but also by 
inward and secret enemies, for the most part of their own 
people. That which the pope does against us is nothing to 
compare with that which Jeckel and others do, to our sorrow 
of heart. 

DCXCVI. 

We ought diligently to be aware of sophistry, which not 
only consists in doubtful and uncertain words, that may be 
construed and turned as one pleases, but also, in each pro- 
fession, in all high arts, as in religion, covers and cloaks itself 
with the fair name of Holy Scripture, alleging to be God's 
word, and spoken from heaven. Those are unworthy of praise 
who can pervert everything, screwing, contemning, and reject- 
ing the meanings and opinions of others, and, like the phi- 
losopher Carneades, disputing in utraque parte, and yet 
conclude nothing certain. These are knavish tricks and 
sophistical inventions. But a fine understanding, honestly 
disposed, that seeks after truth, and loves that which is plain 
and upright, is worthy of all honour and praise. 

DCXCVII. 

Offences by Christians are far more abominable than those 
by the heathen. The prophet Jeremiah says: " The punish- 
ment of the iniquity of the daughter of my people, is greater 
than the punishment of the sin of Sodom," &c. And Ezekiel: 
*' Thou hast justified Sodom with thine abominations." And 
Christ: " It will be more tolerable for Sodom at the day of 
judgment, than with thee." But so it must be: " He came 
unto his own, and his own received him not." Truly this 



OF OFFENCES. 293 

makes the godly altogether ftiint and out of heart, so that 
they rather desire death, for, with sorrow of heart, we find 
that many of our people offend others. We ought diligently 
to pray to God against offences, to the end his name may be 
hallowed. St. Paul says: " Also of our ownselves shall men 
arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after 
them." Therefore the church has no external esteem or suc- 
cession; it inherits not. 

DCXCVIII 

True, much offence proceeds out of my doctrine; but I 
comfort myself, as St. Paul did Titus: whereas this doctrine 
is revealed for the sake of the faith of God's chosen, for 
whose sake we also preach, we mean it earnestly. For the 
sake of others I would not drop one word. I have cracked 
many hollow nuts, and yet I thought they had been good, 
but they fouled my mouth, and filled it with dust; Carlstad 
and Erasmus are mere hollow nuts, and foul the mouth. 

DCXCIX. 

It has been asked: Is an offence, committed in a moment of 
intoxication, therefore excusable? Most assuredly not; on 
the contrary, di'unkenness aggravates the fault. Hidden sins 
unveil themselves when a man's self-possession goes from 
him; that which the sober man keeps in his breast, the 
drunken man lets out at the lips. Astute people, when they 
want to ascertain a man's true character, make him drunk. 
This same drunkenness is a grievous vice among us Germans, 
and should be heavily chastised by the temporal magistrate, 
since the fear of God will not suffice to keep the brawling 
guzzlers in check. 

DCC. 

A rich JeW; on his death bed, ordered that his remains 
should be conveyed to Ratisbon. His friends, knowing that 
even the corpse of a Jew could not travel without paying 
heavy toll, devised the expedient of packing the carcass in a 
barrel of wine, which they then forwarded in the ordinary 
way. The wagoners, not knowing what lay within, tapped 
the barrel, and swilled away right joyously, till they found 
out they had been drinking Jew's pickle. How it fared with 
them you may imao-ine. 



294 Luther's table-talk 



OF A CHRISTIAN LIFE. 

DCCI. 

A Christian's worshipping is not the external, hypocritical 
mask that our spiritual friars wear, when they chastise their 
bodies, torment and make themselves faint, with ostentatious 
fasting, watching, singing, wearing hair shirts, scourging 
themselves, &c. Such worshipping God desires not. 

DCCII. 

'Tis a great blindness of people's hearts that they cannot 
accept of the treasure of grace presented unto them. Such 
people are we, that though we are baptised, have Christ, with 
all his precious gifts, faith, the sacraments, his Word, all 
which we confess to be holy, yet we can neither say nor think 
that we ourselves are holy; we deem it too much to say, we 
ire holy; whereas the name Christian is far more glorious 
and greater than the name holy. 

DCCIII. 

AYe can call consecrated robes, dead men's bones, and such 
trumpery, holy, but not a Christian; the reason is, we gaze 
upon the outward mask, we look after the seeming saint, who 
leads an austere life. Hence that vain opinion in Popedom, 
that they call the dead, saints; an error strengthened by 
Zuinglius. Human wisdom gapes at holy-workers, thinking 
whoso does good works, is just and righteous before God. 

DCCIV. 

There's no better death than St. Stephen's, who said: 
** Lord receive my spirit." We should lay aside the register 
of our sins and deserts, and die in reliance only upon God's 
mere grace and mercy. 

DCCV. 

We ought to retain the feast of John the Baptist, with 
whom the New Testament began, for it is written: " All the 
prophets and the law prophesied until John," &c. We should 
observe it, too, for the sake of the fair song, which in Pope- 
dom we read, but understood not, of Zachariah, which, in- 



OF A CHRISTIAN LIFE. 295 

deed, is a most excellent song, as is shown in St. Luke's 
preface, where he says: "And Zachariah was full of the 
Holy Ghost," &c. 

DCCVI. 

A householder instructs his servants and family in this 
manner: Deal uprightly and honestly, be diligent in that 
which I command you, and ye may then eat, drink, and 
clothe yourselves as ye please. Even so, our Lord God 
regards not what we eat, drink, or how we clothe ourselves; 
all such matters, being ceremonies or middle things, he leaves 
freely to us, on the understanding, however, that we ground 
nothing thereon as being necessary to salvation. 

DCCVII. 

'Twas a strano-e thino- the world should have been offended 
at him who raised the dead, made the blind to see, and the 
deaf to hear, &c. They who deem such a man a devil, what 
manner of God would they have? But here it is. Christ 
would give to the world the kingdom of heaven, but they will 
have the kingdom of the earth, and here they part; for the 
highest wisdom and sanctity of the hypocrites sees nothing 
but temporal honour, carnal will, mundane life, good days, 
money and wealth, all which must vanish and cease. 

DCCVIII. 

The whole world takes offence at the plainness of the 
second table of God's ten commandments, because human 
sense and reason partly understand what is done contrary 
thereto. When God and his Word is contemned, the world 
is silent and regards it not; but when a monastery is taken, 
or flesh eaten on a Friday, or a friar marries, 0, then the 
world cries out: Here are abominable offences! 

DCCIX. 

The obedience towards God is the obedience of faith and 
good works; that is, he w^ho believes in God, and does what 
God has commanded, is obedient unto him; but the obedience 
towards the devil is superstition and evil works; that is, who 
trusts not in God, but is unbelieving, and does evil, is obedient 
UQlo the devil. 



296 Luther's' table-talk. 

DCCX. 

In the Old Testament are two sorts of sacrifices: the first 
was called the early morning sacrifice; thereby is shown that 
we first should offer unto Christ, not oxen or cattle, but our- 
selves, acknowledging God's gifts, corporal and spiritual, 
temporal and eternal, and giving him thanks for them. Se- 
condly, the evening sacrifice; whereby is signified that a 
Christian should offer a broken, humble, and a contrite heart, 
consider his necessities and dangers, both corporal and spi- 
ritual, and call upon God for help. 

DCCXI. 

God will, say some, that we should serve him freely 
and willingly, \vhereas he that serves God out of fear of 
punishment, of hell, or out of a hope and love of recompence, 
serves and honours God not uprightly or truly. This argu- 
ment is of the stoics, who reject the affections of human 
nature. It is true we ought willingly to serve, love, and 
fear God, as the chief good. But God can well endure that 
we love him for his promise' sake, and pray unto him for 
corporal and spiritual benefits; he therefore has commanded 
us to pray. So God can also endure that we fear him for 
the punishment's sake, as the prophets remember. Indeed, 
it is somewhat, that a human creature can acknowledge God's 
everlasting punishment and rewards. And if one looks 
thereupon, as not being the chief end and cause, then it hurts 
him not, especially if he has regard to God himself, as the 
final cause, w^ho gives everything for nothing, out of mere 
grace, without our deserts. 

DCCXIL 

The word, to worship, means to stoop and bow down the 
body with external gestures; to serve in the work. But to 
worship God in spirit is the service and honour of the heart; 
it comprehends faith and fear in God. The worshipping of 
God is twofold, outward and inward — that is, to acknowledge 
God's benefits, and to be thankful unto him. 

DCCXIII. 

A certain prince of Germany, well known to me, went to 
Compostella in Spain, where they pretend St. James, brother 
of the Evangelist St. John, lies buried. This prince made 



OF MARRIAGE AND CELIBACY. 297 

his confession to a Franciscan, an honest man, who asked him 
if he were a German? The prince answered, yes. Then the 
friar said: " O, loving child, w-hy seekest thou so far away that 
which thou hast much better in Germany? I have seen and 
read the writings of an Augustin friar, touching indulgences 
and the pardons of sin, wherein he powerfully proves that 
the true remission of sins consists in the merits and sufferings 
of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. loving son, remain 
thereby, and permit not thyself to be otherwise persuaded. 
I purpose shortly, God willing, to leave this unchristian life, 
to repair into Germany, and to join the Augustin friar." 

DCCXIV. 

Since the gospel has been preached, which is not above 
twenty years, such great wonders have been done as were not 
in many hundred years before. No man ever thought such 
alterations should happen; that so many monasteries should 
be made empty, that the private mass should be abolished in 
Germany, despite heretics, sectaries, and tyrants. Rome has 
twice been ravaged, and many great princes, who persecuted 
the gospel, have been thrown down to the ground and de- 
stroyed. 



OF MARRIAGE AND CELIBACY. 

DCCXV. 

A PREACHER of the gospel, being regularly called, ought, 
above all things, first, to purify himself before he teaches 
others. Is he able, with a good conscience, to remain un- 
married? let him so remain; but if he cannot abstain living 
chastely, then let him take a wife; God has made that plaster 
for that sore. 

DCCXVI. 

It is written in the first book of Moses, concerning matri- 
mony: God created a man and a woman, and blessed them. 
Now, although this sentence was chiefly spoken of human 
creatures, yet we may apply it to all the creatures of the 
world — to the fowls of the air, the lish in the waters, and the 
beasts of the field, wherein we find a male and a femaU 



298 Luther's table-talk. 

consorting together, engendering and increasing. In all these, 
God has placed before our eyes the state of matrimony. We 
have its image, also, even in the trees and earth. 

DCCXVII. 

Between husband and wife there should be no question at 
to meum and timm. All things should be in common between 
them, without any distinction or means of distinguishing. 

DCCXVIII. 

St. Augustin said, finely: A marriage without children is 
the world without the sun. 

DCCXIX. 

Maternity is a glorious thing, since all mankind have been 
conceived, born, and nourished of women. All human laws 
should encourage the multiplication of families. 

DCCXX, 

The world regards not, nor comprehends the works of 
God. Who can sufficiently admire the state of conjugal 
union, which God has instituted and founded, and whence all 
human creatures, yea, all states proceed. Where were we, 
if it existed not? But neither God's ordinance, nor the gra- 
cious presence of children, the fruit of matrimony, moves the 
ungodly world, which beholds only the temporal difficulties 
and troubles of matrimony, but sees not the great treasure 
that is hid therein. We were all born of woman — emperors, 
kings, princes, yea, Christ himself, the Son of God, did not 
disdain to be born of a virgin. Let the contemners and re- 
jecters of matrimony go hang, the Anabaptists and Adamites, 
who recognise not marriage, but live all together like animals, 
and the papists, who reject married life, and yet have strum- 
pets; if they must needs contemn matrimony, let them be 
consistent, and keep no concubines. 

DCCXXI. 

The state of matrimony is the chief in the world after re- 
ligion; but people shun it because of its inconveniences, like 
one who, running out of the rain, falls into the river. We 
ought herein to have more regard to God's conSmand and 
ordinance, for the sake of the generation, and the bringing 
up of children, than to our untoward humours and cogitations; 
and further, we should consider that it is a physic against 



OF MARRIAGE AND CELIBACY. 299 

Sin and unchastity. None, indeed, should be compelled to 
marry; the matter should be left to each man's conscience, 
for bride-love may not be forced. God has said: " It is not 
good that the man should be alone;" and St. Paul compares the 
church to a spouse, or bride and a bridegroom. But let us 
ever take heed that, in marrying, we esteem neither money 
nor wealth, great descent, nobility, nor lasciviousness. 

DCCXXII. 

He who intends to marry, should consider these points fol- 
lowing: 1. God's command. 2. The Lord Christ's confirma- 
tion thereof. 3. The gift or present of Christ. 4. The first 
blessing. 5. The promise that is made thereunto. 6. The 
communion and fellowship. 7. The examples of the holy 
patriarchs. 8. The temporal laws and ordinances. 9. The 
precious benediction and blessing. 10. The examples of the 
wicked. 11. The threatening of St. Paul. 12. The natural 
rights. 13. The nature and kind of the creation. 14. The 
practice of faith and hope. 

DCCXXIII. 

The Lord has never changed the rules he imposed on mar- 
riage, but in the case of the conception of his Son Jesus 
Christ. The Turks, however, are of opinion that 'tis no un- 
common thing for a virgin to bear a child. I would by no 
means introduce this belief into my family. 

DCCXXIV. 

Dr. Forsteimius asked, whether a man, whose wife, guilty 
of adultery, has run away from him, might marry another, 
while the former wife yet lived, without the offence of 
adultery? Luther answered: St. Paul says: " If the unbe- 
lieving depart, let him depart; a brother or a sister is not 
under bondage in such cases, but God hath called us to 
peace." Here St. Paul plainly permits the other marriage. 

DCCXXV 

Men have broad and large chests, and small narrow hips, 
and more understanding than the women, who have but 
small and narrow breasts, and broad hips, to the end they 
should remain at home, sit still, keep house, and bear and 
bring up children. 



300 Luther's table-talk. 

DCCXXVI. 

Marrying cannot be without women, nor can the world 
subsist without them. To marry is physic against inconti- 
nence. A woman is, or at least should be, a friendly, 
courteous, and merry companion in life, whence they are 
named, by the Holy Ghost, house-honours, the honour and 
ornament of the house, and inclined to tenderness, for there- 
unto are they chiefly created, to bear children, and be the 
pleasure, joy, and solace of their husbands. 

DCCXXVII. 

Dr. Luther said one day to his wife: You make me do 
what you will; you have full sovereignty here, and I award 
you, with all my heart, the command in all household matters, 
reserving my rights in other points. Never any good came 
out of female domination. God created Adam master and 
lord of living creatures, but Eve spoilt all, when she per- 
suaded him to set himself above God's will. 'Tis you 
women, with your tricks and artifices, that lead men into 
error. 

DCCXXVIII. 

On what pretence can man have interdicted marriage, 
which is a law of nature? 'Tis as though we were forbidden 
to eat, to drink, to sleep. That which God has ordained and 
regulated, is no longer a matter of the human will, which we 
may adopt or reject with impunity. 'Tis the most certain 
sign of God's enmity to Popedom, that he has allowed it to 
assail the conjugal union of the sexes. 

DCCXXIX. 

There is no greater plague in this life than a morose and 
unchaste wife. Solomon says, that to be married to a woman 
one dislikes, is the worst of calamities. 

DCCXXX. 

When I began to discern the impiety and tyranny of celi- 
bacy, distrusting my own judgment, I called upon Dr 
Jerome SchurfF, and asked him to point out to me, in the 
decretals, some assigned reasons for imposing this tyranny 
upon the consciences of priests. I had not then the same 
ieeling with regard to monks, who had made a vow on the 



OF MARRIAGE AND CELIBACY. 301 

subject. The doctor gave me no distinct answer, vaguely 
saying, that the pope compelled no one to assume the priest- 
hood, so he left me as much in doubt and difficulty as before. 

DCCXXXI. 

It was mentioned at table that a book had just been pub- 
lished, setting forth the apology of bigamy: the doctor for 
awhile remained silent, and seemed plunged in grave reverie. 
At length he said: " I have often wondered at the king of 
Arabia having seven hundred wives." Some one observed: 
" Sir doctor, what say you to Solomon, who had three hun- 
dred wives, or queens, and seven hundred concubines? The 
text, moreover, adding, that the number of young girls at his 
court had not been reckoned up." The doctor replied: " 'Tis 
to be kept in mind that the list of queens in Scripture com- 
prehends the royal family of David, who were supported by 
his son. The elector of Saxony has a great number of ladies 
at his court, princesses, noble damsels, women of honour, 
maids of honour, women of the bedchamber, and what not; 
but it does not follow tliat these are all his wives. As to 
Solomon's having entertained all these women as his wives, 
*tis out of the question, impracticable." Some one asked, did 
Solomon perform penitence? Luther replied: "No, but the 
Scripture tells us, ' He slept with his fathers,' wherefore I 
conclude he was admitted to beatitude, such being the mean- 
ing of that expression, which is not employed with reference 
to Absalom. Scotus has formally damned Solomon." 

DCCXXXII. 

'Tis a grand thing for a married pair to live in perfect 
union, but the devil rarely permits this. When they are 
apart, they cannot endure the separation, and when they are 
together, they cannot endure the always seeing one another. 
'Tis as the poet says: Nee tecum vivere possum, nee sine te. 
Married people must assiduously pray against these assaults 
of the devil. I have seen marriages where, at first, husband 
and wife seemed as though they would eat one another up: 
in six months they have separated in mutual disgust. 'Tis 
the devil inspires this evanescent ardour, in order to divert 
tbe parties from prayer. 



302 Luther's table-talk. 

dccxxxiii. 
We must hold no relations with those who seek to set up 
houses of evil resort. We must resolutely repress the 
devil, instead of encouraging him. They who would restore 
the bagnios are not Christians, but pagans, knowing not God. 
The Lord has said he will punish debauchery, and assuredly 
he will also punish those who foster and authorize it. It may 
be said, if we have not public establishments of the kind, the 
result will be fearful disorder in families. I answer that 
God, of his grace, has instituted a remedy, marriage. I hold 
that the example of public licence in this respect is calcu- 
lated to draw women and girls into vice. We must in no 
way tolerate, or even wink at, aught that is contrary to the 
will of God: fiatjustitia et pereat mundus. 

DCCXXXIV. 

Both the Old and the New Testament attribute eminence 
and honour to the married state. Abraham had three wives; 
Jesus Christ was present at a marriage ceremony, and per- 
formed his first miracle there. St. Paul, himself a widower, 
enjoins bishops to marry, and predicts that the injunction of 
ceUbacy will cause much evil; St. Peter had a son-in-law, 
and consequently must have been himself married; St. James, 
our Saviour's brother, and indeed all the apostles, except St, 
John, were married men; Spiridiron, bishop of Cyprus, was 
a married man, and so was bishop Hilary, of whom we have 
a letter, addressed to his daughter, telling her he knows a 
rich man, meaning Christ, who, if she remains pious and 
good, will give her a fine robe, adorned with gold. 

DCCXXXV. 

There are two sorts of adultery; spiritual adultery, com- 
mitted only in sight of God, when one desires the husband 
or wife of another; and bodily adultery, when the offence is 
actually committed, a crime most odious, but little regarded 
by the world, a crime at once against God, against society, 
and against one's family. 

DCCXXXVL 

I am persuaded that if God had not ordained marriage, 
but had left men to associate with the first women they met, 
lliey themselves would very speedily have become tired of this 



OF MARRIAGE AND CELIBACY. 303 

disorderly course, and have prayed for marriage, since 'tis 
the very prohibition to do wrong which most excites to 
wrong. The ancients said: Nitimur in vetitum, semper 
cupimusque negata. Quod licet ingratum est, quod non licet 
acrius 2irit. 

DCCXXXVII. 

Dr. Luther said, in reference to those who write satirical 
attacks upon women, that such will not go unpunished. If 
the author be one of high rank, rest assured he is not really 
of noble origin, but a surreptitious intruder into the family. 
What defects women have, we must check them for in 
private, gently by word of mouth, for woman is a frail 
vessel. The doctor then turned round and said: let us talk 
of something else. 

DCCXXXVIII. 

Mention was made of a young girl who, to avoid violence 
offered her by a nobleman, threw herself from the window, 
and was killed. It was asked, was she responsible for her 
death? Doctor Luther said: No: she felt that this step 
formed her only chance of safety, it being not her life she 
sought to save, but her chastity. 

DCCXXXIX. 

There was at Frankfort-on-the-Oder, a schoolmaster, a 
pious and learned man, whose heart was fervently inclined to 
theology, and who had preached several times with great 
applause. He was called to the dignity of deacon, but his 
wifp, a violent, fierce woman, would not consent to his 
accepting the charge, saying, she would not be the wife of a 
minister. 

It became a question, what was the poor man to do? 
which was he to renounce, his preachership, or his wife? 
Luther, at first, said jocosely: " Oh, if he has married, as you 
tell me, a widow, he must needs obey her." But, after 
awhile, he resumed, severely: " The wife is bound to follow 
her husband, not the husband his wife. This must be an ill 
woman, nay, the devil incarnate, to be ashamed of a charge 
with which our Lord and his apostles were invested. If she 
w«u-e my wife, I should shortly say to her: ' Wilt thou follow 



304 Luther's table-talij;* 

mc, aye or no? Heply forthwith,' and if she replied: No: I 
would leave her, and take another wife." 

DCCXL. 

He who has an old, spiteful, quarrelsome, sickly wife, may 
fairly reckon himself in purgatory. 

DCCXLT. 

It was asked, does he who, by his own consent, carries off a 
girl he loves, commit a sin or offence, sihce volenti non -fit 
injuria. Dr. Luther replied: The injury is done, not to 
her who gives her consent, but to her parents, who, against 
their will, are deprived of their daughter. 'Tis therefore a 
robbery, and as such, justly visited of the imperial law with 
severe punishment. The Roman antichrist, however, in his 
decretals, excuses this crime. 

DCCXLII. 

The polygamy of the patriarchs, Gideon, David, Solomon, 
&c., w^as a matter of necessity, not of libertinism. The Jews 
were constrained to have several wives, from the necessity of 
the promise, and of consanguinity. Abraham, Isaac, and 
Jacob received from God the promise that he would multiply 
their seed as the stars of heaven, or the sands of the sea. The 
Jews, having their attention constantly directed to this pro- 
mise, to accomplish it were fain to take several wives each. 
The necessity of consanguinity was this, that when a man 
was elected judge or king, all his poor female relations 
crowded about him, and he had to take them as wives or 
concubines. Concubinage was lawful among the Jews, and 
was, indeed, a mode of aiding distressed relatives, widows 
and orphans, to whom it secured food and raiment. It was 
a burdensome imposition rather than an ' agreeable relaxa- 
tion. Solomon's wives, most of them, were probably no more 
to him than my nieces, Magdalen and Elizabeth, are to me, 
who have remained under my roof virgins, as when they 
came here. 

DCCXLIII. 

When the emperor Sigismund convoked a council at Con- 
stance, tbe cardinal would not hear of any reform, and said: 
We will have no Schismam. The emperor rejoined: What. 



OF MARRIAGE AND CELIBACY. 30.5 

know ye notPriscian? You should say, Schisma, not Sc?iis 
mam. But the cardinals replied: We are above all rules and 
laws, and care not a rush for Priscian. 

DCCXLIV. 

Jephtha made a foolish and a superstxtious vow; so 
that after he had got the victory, he had to tlay his own 
daughter. It had been well if, at that time, some godly man 
had been present, and had said unto him — Jephtha! thou 
shouldst not slay thy daughter, for the sake of thy rash and 
foolish vow; thou must understand the laAv of vows accord- 
ing to equity, and not so precisely according to the word, for 
thou didst not mean it so. Thus, the godly young man, 
Jonathan, was released from the vow he had made to his 
father, king Saul, and was delivered from death. The reason 
why Jephtha's daughter bewailed her virginity two months, 
was, that she died without children, which among the Jews 
was held a great calamity; as we see in Hannah, Samuel's 
mother. And, indeed, 'tis an irksome thing to honest mar- 
ried people, to be barren; children are the best pledges and 
bonds of matrimony. They are the best wool of the sheep. 

DCCXLV. 

The lawyers and canonists are of opinion, that the sub- 
stance of matrimony is the consent of the bride and bride- 
groom, and that the privilege and power of the parents is but 
an accidental thing, without which matrimony may well be 
accomplished, and that we ought not to resist or hinder the 
substance, for the sake of the accidents. And 'tis quite true 
that consent is the substance and ground of matrimony, for 
where no love or consent is, there must needs be an unhappy 
marriage. And further, when such children are punished, 
thinking thereby to affright them, we shall nothing prevail, 
for youth in this matter will not desist through temporal 
punishment. 

DCCXLVI. 

When one in Popedom is godfather or mother to another's 
child, this relationship bars marriage between those persons. 
Now, this is altogether ridiculous, or rather 'tis one of the 
Pope's money- nets. Marriages made for the sake of weahn, 
are commonly accursed; rich women, for the most part, are 

X 



306 Luther's table-talk. 

haughty, cross, and negligent, and waste more than they 
bring. 

DCCXLVII. 

There are two causes of divorce: first, adultery; but first. 
Christians ought to labour and to use diligent persuasions to re- 
concile the married pair; sharply, withal, reproving the guilty 
person. The second cause is much like; when one runs 
away from the other, and after returning runs away again. 
Such have commonly their mates in other places, and richly 
deserve to be punished. 

DCCXLVIII. 

I advise in every thing that ministers interfere not in 
matrimonial questions. First, because we have enough to do 
in our own office; secondly, because these affairs concern not 
the church, but are temporal things, pertaining to temporal 
magistrates; thirdly, because such cases are in a manner 
innumerable; they are very high, broad and deep, and pro- 
duce many great offences, which may tend to the shame and 
dishonour of the gospel. Moreover, we are therein ill dealt 
with; they draw us into the business, and then, if the issue 
is evil, the blame is altogether laid upon us. Therefore, we 
will leave them to the lawyers and magistrates. Ministers 
ought only to advise and counsel the consciences, out of God's 
Word, when need requires. 

DCCXLIX. 

In the synod of Leipzig, the lawyers concluded, that secret 
marriages should be punished with banishment, and the par- 
ties be disinherited. Whereupon I sent them word, I would 
not allow thereof; it were too gross. Yet I hold it fitting, 
that they who secretly contract themselves, ought sharply to 
be reproved; yea, also, in some measure punished. 

DCCL. 

Master John Holstein asked, when two contract themselves, 
verbis de futuro, as when I say, I will marry thee, is this 
to be understood of the time to come, or no? Luther said: 
those words ought to be understood of the present time; for 
this word ( Volo) I will, signifies a present will. All bar 
gains, contracts, and promises are to be understood as of the 
present time; as when a fellow says to a maid: When I come 



& 



OF MARRIAGE AND CELIBACY. 35? 

again, which will be, God willing, two years hence, I wi!] 
marrj thee. These words are to be understood of the pre- 
sent time, and when he comes again, he must marry her; 
and it is not in his power, in the interval, to alter his mind. 

DCCLI. 

The hair is the finest ornament women have. Of old, 
virgins used to wear it loose, except when they were in 
mourning. I like women to let their hair fall down their 
back; 'tis a most agreeable sight. 

DCCLII. 

The reproduction of mankind is a great marvel and mystery. 
Had God consulted me in the matter, I should have advised 
him to continue the generation of the species by fashionin 
them of clay, in the way Adam was fashioned ; as I should 
have counselled him also, to let the sun remain always sus- 
pended over the earth, like a great lamp, maintaining per- 
petual light and heat. 

DCCLIII. 

The celibacy of spiritual persons began in the time of 
Cyprian, who lived two hundred and fifty years after the 
birth of Christ; so that this superstition has continued thir- 
teen hundred years. St. Ambrose and others believed not 
that they were human creatures, like other people. 

DCCLIV. 

St. Ulrich, bishop of Augsburg, related a fearful thing 
th'At befel at Rome. Pope Gregory, who confirmed celibacy, 
ordered a fish-pond at Rome, hard by a convent of nuns, to 
be cleared out. The water being let off, there were found, 
at the bottom, more than six thousand skulls of children, that 
had been cast into the pond and drowned. Such were the 
fruits of enforced celibacy. Hereupon Pope Gregory abolished 
celibacy, but the popes who succeeded him, re-established it. 

In our own time, there was in Austria, at Nieuberg, a 
convent of nuns, who, by reason of their licentious doings, 
were removed from it, and placed elsewhere, and their con- 
vent filled with Franciscans. These monks, wishing to en- 
large the building, foundations were dug, and in excavating 
there were found twelve great pots, in each of which was the 

x2 



308 Luther's table-talk. 

carcass of an infant. How much better to let these people 
marry, than, by prohibition thereof, to cause the murder of so 
many innocent creatures. 



OF PRINCES AND POTENTATES. 

DCCLV. 

Government is a sign of the divine grace, of the mercy of 
God, who has no pleasure in murdering, killing, and strangling. 
Jf God left all things to go which way they would, as among 
the Turks and other nations, w^ithout good government, we 
should quickly despatch one another out of this world. 

DCCLVI. 

Parents keep their children with greater diligence and care 
than rulers and governors keep their subjects. Fathers and 
mothers are masters naturally and willingly; it is a self-grown 
dominion; but rulers and magistrates have a compulsory 
mastery; they act by force, with a prepared dominion; w^hen 
father and mother can rule no more, the public police must 
take the matter in hand. Rulers and magistrates must watch 
over the sixth commandment. 

DCCLVII. 

The temporal magistrate is even like a fish-net, set before 
the fish in a pond or a lake, but God is the plunger, who drives 
the fish into it. For w' hen a thief, robber, adulterer, mur- 
derer, is ripe, he hunts him into the net, that is, causes him 
to be taken by the magistrate, and punished; for it is written: 
" God is judge upon earth." Therefore, repent, or thou must 
be punished. 

DCCLVIII. 

Princes and rulers should maintain the laws and statutes, 
or they will be contemned. They should, above all, hold the 
gospel in honour, and bear it ever in their hands, for it aids 
and preserves them, and enobles the state and office of ma- 
gistracy, so that they know where their vocation and calling 
is, and that with good and safe conscience they may execute 
the works of their office. At Rome, the executioner always 



OF PRINCES AND POTENTATES. 309 

craved pardon of the condemned malefiictor, when he was to 
execute his office, as though he were doing wrong, or sinning 
in executing the criminal; whereas 'tis his proper office, which 
God has set. St. Paul says: "'He beareth not the sword in 
vain;" he is God's minister, a revenger, to execute wrath 
upon him that does evil. When the magistrate punishes, 
God himself punishes. 

DCCLIX. 

It is impossible that where a prince or potentate is ung* dly, 
his counsellors should not be ungodly. As is the master, 
such are also his servants. This follows necessarily and cer- 
tainly. Solomon says: " A master that hath pleasure in 
lying, his servants are ungodly;'* it never fails. 

DCCLX. 

The magistracy is a necessary state in the world, and to be 
held in honour; therefore we ought to pray for magistrates, 
who may easily be corrupted and spoiled. Honores mutant 
mores, numquam in meliores : Honours alter a man's man- 
ners, and seldom for the better. The prince who governs 
without laws, according to his own brain, is a monster, worse 
than a wild beast; but he who governs according to the pre- 
scribed laws and rights, is like unto God, who is an erecter 
and founder of laws and rights. 

DCCLXI. 

Governors should be wise, of a courageous spirit, and 
should know how to rule alone without their counsellors. 

DCCLXII. 

Temporal government is preserved not only by laws 
and rights, but by divine authority; 'tis God maintains go- 
vernments, otherwise the greatest sins in the world would 
remain unpunished. Our Lord God, in the law, shows what 
his will is, and how the evil should be punished. And foras- 
much as the law^ punishes not a potentate, prince, or ruler, 
therefore our Lord God, one day, will call him to an account 
and punish him. In this life, governors and rulers catch but 
only gnats and little flies with their laws, but the w^asps and 
great humble bees tear through, as through a cobweb; that 
is, the small offi^nces and offenders are punished, but the abo- 
minable extortioners and oppressors who grind the faces ci 



310 Luther's table-talk. 

Ihe poor, the fatherless and widows, go scot-free, and are 
held in high honour. 

DCCLXIII. 

To the business of government appertain, not common, 
illiterate people, or servants, but champions; understanding, 
wise, and courageous men, who are to be trusted, and who 
aim at the common good and prosperity, not seeking their 
own gain and profit, or following their own desires, pleasures, 
and delights; but how few governors and rulers think 
hereon? They make a trade and traffic of government; 
they cannot govern themselves: how, then, should they 
govern great territories and multitudes of people. Solomon 
says: " A man that can rule and curb his mind, is better 
than he that assaulteth and overcometh cities," &c. 

I could well wish that Scipio, that much-honoured champion, 
were in heaven; he was able to govern and overcome himself, 
and to curb his mind, the highest and most laudable victory. 
Frederick, prince elector of Saxony, was another such prince; 
he could curb himself, though by nature of an angry mood. 
In the song of Solomon, it is said: " My vineyard which is 
mine, is before me;" that is, God has taken the government 
to himself, to the end no man may brag and boast thereof. 
God will be king and ruler; he will be minister and pastor; 
he will be master in the house; he alone will be governor; 
pastovy episcopus, CcBsar, rex, vir et uxor errant, sed non 
Deus. 

DCCLXIV. 

Potentates and princes, now-a-days, when they take in 
hand an enterprise, do not pray before they begin, but set to 
work calculating: three times three make nine, twice seven 
are fourteen — so-and-so will do so-and-so — in this manner will 
the business surely take effect — but our Lord God says unto 
them: For whom, then, do ye hold me? for a cypher? Do I 
sit here above in vain, and to no purpose? You shall know, 
that I will twist your accounts about finely, and make them 
all false reckonings. 

DCCLXV. 

Pilate was a more honest and just man than any papist 
prince of the empire. I could name many of these, who are 
ic no degree comparable with Pilate; for he kept strictly to 



OF PRINCES AND POTENTATES. 511 

the Roman laws. He would not that the innocent should be 
executed and slain without hearing, and he availed himself 
of all just means w^hereby to release Christ; but when they 
threatened him with the emperor's disfavour, he was dazzled, 
and forsook the imperial laws, thinking, it is but the loss of 
one man, w^ho is both poor and contemned; no man takes his 
part; what hurt can I receive by his death? Better it is that 
one man die, than that the whole nation be against me. 

Dr. Mathesius and Pomer debated this question, why 
Pilate scourged Christ, and asked: What is truth? The 
former argued that Pilate did it out of compassion; but the 
other, that it was done out of tyranny and contempt. Where- 
upon Luther said: Pilate scourged Christ out of great com- 
passion, to the end he might still, thereby, the insatiable 
wrath and raging of the Jews. And in that he said to 
Christ: AVhat is truth? he meant: Why wilt thou dispute 
concerning truth in these wicked times ? Truth is here of 
no value. Thou must think of some other plan; adopt some 
lawyer's quiddity, and then, perchance, thou mayest be 
released. 

DCCLXVI. 

Philip Melancthon and myself have justly deserved, at 
God's hands, as much riches in this world as any one cardinal 
possesses; for we liave done more in his business than a hun- 
dred cardinals. But God says unto us: Be ye contented that 
ye have me. When we have him, then have we also the 
purse; for although we had the purse and had not God, so 
had we nothing. 

God said to Ezekiel: " Thou son of man, Nebuchadnezzar 
caused his army to serve a great service against Tyre, yet he 
had no wages; what shall I give him? I will give the land 
of Egypt to Nebuchadnezzar, that shall be his wages." So 
plays God with great kingdoms, taking them from one, a»"* 
giving them to another. 

DCCLXVII. 

At the imperial diet, at Augsburg, certain princes there 
spoke in praise of the riches and advantages of their respec- 
tive principalities. The prince elector of Saxony said: He 
had, in his country, store of silver mines, which brought him 
great revenues. The prince elector palatine extolled his 



312 Luther's table-talk. 

vineyards on the Khine. When it became the turn of Eber- 
hard, prince of Wirtemberg, he said: "I am, indeed, but a 
poor prince, and not to be compared with either of you; yet, 
nevertheless, I have also in my country a rich and precious 
jewel; namely, that if at any time I should ride astray in my 
country, and were left all alone in the fields, yet I could 
safely and securely sleep in the bosom of any one of my sub- 
jects, who all, for my service, are ready to venture body, 
goods, and blood." And, indeed, his people esteemed him as 
a pater patrice. When the other two princes heard this, they 
confessed that; in truth, his Avas the most rich and precious 
jewel. 

DCCLXVIII 

I invited to dinner, at my house at Wittenberg, prince 
Ernest of Luneberg, and prince William of Mecklenburg, 
who much complained of the immeasurable swilling and drink- 
ing kind of life at courts; and yet they will all be good Chris- 
tians. I said: The potentates and princes ought to look into 
this. Then prince Ernest said: Ah! sir, we that are princes 
do even so ourselves, otherwise 'twould have gone down 
long since ; confessing that the intemperance of princes 
caused the intemperance of the people. And truly, when the 
abbot throws the dice, the whole convent will play. The 
example of governors greatly influences the subjects. 

DCCLXIX. 

Some one asked, whether sir Thomas More was executed 
for the gospel's sake or no? I answered: No, in no wise; he 
was a cruel tyrant; he was the king's chief counsellor; a 
very learned and wise man, doubtless, but he shed the blood 
of many innocent Christians .that confessed the gospel; he 
tormented them with strange instruments, like a hangman; 
first, he personally examined them under a green tree, and 
then cruelly tortured them in prison. At last, he opposed 
the edict of the king and kingelom. He was disobedient, and 
was punished. 

DCCLXX. 

We have this advantage; no council has condemnecTus for 
heretics; the laws of the empire define a heretic to be one 
who obstinately maintains errors, which we have never done, 
but have shown and produced witnesses out of God's Word, 



OF PRINCES AND POTENTATES. 313 

and the Holy Scriptures; we willingly hear the opinions of 
others, but we will not endure the pope to be judge; we 
make him a party. 

DCCLXXI. 

The emperor Maximilian in his campaigns was very super- 
stitious. In times of danger, he would make a vow to offer 
up as sacrifice what first met him. One of his captains had 
taken captive a very fair virgin of an ancient family in Ger- 
many, and of the protestant religion, whom he loved exceed- 
ingly; but he was forced by the emperor to kill her with his 
own hands. We Christians have a great advantage in war 
against our enemies, that of faith in prayer, whereas the infi- 
dels know nothing of faith or prayer. 

DCCLXXIl. 

Not long since king Ferdinand came into a monastery where 
I was, and going over it was attracted by these letters, written 
in large characters, on a wall: 

" M.N.M.G.M.M.M.M." 

After reflecting for some time on their meaning, he turned 
to his secretary, and asked him what he thought they signified? 
the secretary replied: " Your majesty will not be angry at 
my interpretation?" "No, truly," said the king. "Well, 
then," returned the secretary, " I expound the letters thus: 
M.N. Mentitur Nausea (the archbishop of Vienna); M.G. 
Mentitur Gallus (the court preacher); M.M.M.M. Mentiun- 
tur Majores (the Franciscans); ^linores, (the Carmelites); 
Minotaurii (monks of the Alps); all are liars." The king bit 
his lips, and passed on. 'Twas a very ingenious explanation 
of ]Mi\ Secretary's. 

DCCLXXIII. 

Princes, now-a-days, have no order in the administration 
of their household. Four imperial towns spend more in 
luxuries and junkettings in one day, than Solomon spent, 
throughout all his kingdom, in a month. They are poor 
creatures, these princes, well entitled to our compassion. 

DCCLXXIV. 

God deals with great potentates, kings, and princes, even. 
as cliildren v/ith playing cards. While they have good caras. 



314 Luther's table-talk. 

they hold them in their hands; when they have bad, they get 
weary of them, and throw them under the chair; just so does 
God with great potentates: while they are governing well, he 
holds them for good; but so soon as they exceed, and govern 
ill, he throws them down from their seat, and there he lets' 
them lie. 



OF DISCORD. 

DCCLXXV. 

The 10th of February, 1546, John, prince elector of Saxony, 
said: A controversy were easily settled, if the parties would 
exhibit some concord. Luther said: We would willingly have 
concord, but no man seeks after the medium of concord, which 
is charity. We seek riches, but no man seeks after the right 
means how to be rich, namely, through God's blessing. We 
all desire to be saved, but the world refuses the means how 
to be saved — the Mediator Christ. 

In former times potentates and princes referred their con- 
troversies to faithful people, and did not so readily thrust them 
into the lawyer's hands. When people desire to be recon- 
ciled and to come to an agreement, one party must yield, and 
give way to the other. If God and mankind should be recon- 
ciled and agreed, God must give over his right and justice, 
and must lay aside his wrath; and we, mankind, must also lay 
down our own righteousness, for we also would needs be gods 
in Paradise; we thougiit ourselves wise as God, through the 
serpent's seduction; then Christ was fain to make an agree- 
ment between us; he interposed in the cause, and would be a 
mediator between God and man; this Mediator for his pains 
got the portion of a peace-maker, namely, the cross; he that 
parts two fighters, commonly gets the hardest knocks for him- 
self. Even so Christ suffered and presented us with his 
passion and death; he died for our sakes, and for the sake of 
our justification he arose again. Thus the generation of 
mankind became reconciled with God. 

DCCLXXVI. 

When two goats meet upon a narrow bridge over deep water* 
how do they behave? neither of them can turn back again. 



OF SICKNESS. 315 

neither can pass the other, because the bridge is too narrow; 
if they should thrust one another, they might both fall into 
the water and be drowned; nature, then, has taught them, 
that if the one lays himself down and permits the other to go 
over him, both remain without hurt. Even so people should 
rather endure to be trod upon, than to fall into debate and 
discord one with another. 

DCCLXXVIl. 

A Christian, for the sake of his own person, neither curses 
nor revenges himself; but faith curses and revenges itself. To 
understand this rightly, we must distinguish God and man, 
the person and cause. In what concerns God and his cause, 
we must have no patience, nor bless; as for example, when 
the ungodly persecute the gospel, this touches God and his 
cause, and then we are not to bless or to wish good success, 
but rather to curse the persecutors and their proceedings. 
Such is called faith's cursing, which, rather than it would 
suffer God's Word to be suppressed and heresy maintained, 
would have all creatures go to wreck; for through heresy we 
lose God himself. Numbers, xvi. But individuals personally 
ought not to revenge themselves, but to suffer all things, and 
according to Christ's doctrine and the nature of love, to do 
good to their enemies. 



OF SICKNESSES, AND OF THE CAUSES 
THEREOF. 

DCCLXXVIII. 

When young children cry lustily, they grow well and rapidly, 
for through crying, the members and veins are stretched out, 
which have no other exercise. , 

DCCLXXIX. 

A question was put to Luther: How these two sentences 
in Scripture might be reconciled together; first, concern- 
ing the sick of the palsy, where Christ says: " Son, be 
of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee." Where Christ 
intimates that sin was the cause of the palsy, and of every 
sickness. Second, touching him that was born blind, where 



316 Luther's table-talk. 

John says: " That neither he nor his parents had sinned.** 
Luther answered: In these words Christ testifies that the 
blind had not sinned, and sin is not the cause of blindness, 
for only active sins, which one commits personally, are the 
cause of sicknesses and plagues, not original sin; therefore 
the sins which the sick of the palsy himself committed were 
the cause of his palsy, whereas original sin was not the cause 
of the blindness of him that was born blind, or all people 
must be born blind, or be sick of the palsy. 

DCCLXXX. 

Experience has proved the toad to be endowed with valu- 
able qualities. If you run a stick through three toads, and, 
after having dried them in the sun, apply them to any pesti- 
lent tumour, they draw out all the poison, and the malady- 
will disappear. 

DCCLXXXI. 

The cramp is the lightest sickness, and I believe the fall- 
ing sickness a piece of the cramp, the one in the head, the 
other in the feet and legs; when the person feeling either 
moves quickly, or runs, it vanishes. 

DCCLXXXII. 

Sleep is a most useful and most salutary operation of 
nature. Scarcely any minor annoyance angers me more than 
the being suddenly awakened out of a pleasant slumber. I 
understand, that in Italy they torture poor people by depriving 
them of sleep. 'Tis a torture that cannot long be endured. 

DCCLXXXIII. 

The physicians in sickness consider only of what natural 
causes the malady proceeds, and this they cure, or not, with 
their physic. But they see not that often the devil casts a 
sickness upon one without any natural causes. A higher 
physic must be required to resist the devil's diseases; namely, 
faith and prayer, which physic may be fetched out of God';. 
Word. The 31st Psalm is good thereunto, where Davit 
says: " Into thine hand I commit my spirit." This passage ] 
learned, in my sickness, to correct; in the first translation, 1 
apphed it only to the hour of death: but it should be said : 
My health, my happiness, my life, misfortune, sickness, death, 



OF SICKNESS. 317 

&c., stand all in thy hands. Experience testifies this; for 
when we think, now we will be joyful and merry, easy and 
healthy, God soon sends what makes us quite the contrary. 

When I was ill at Schmalcalden, the physicians made me 
take as much medicine as though I had been a great bull. 
Ahick for him that depends upon the aid of physic. I do not 
deny that medicine is a gift of God, nor do I refuse to acknow- 
ledge science in the skill of many physicians; but, take the best 
of them, how far are they from perfection? A sound regimen 
produces excellent effects. When I feel indisposed, by observ- 
ing a strict diet and going to bed early, I generally manage to 
get round again, that is, if I can keep my mind tolerably at 
rest. 1 have no objection to the doctors acting upon certain 
theories, but, at the same time, they must not expect us to be 
the slaves of their fancies. We find Avicenna and Galen, 
living in other times and in other countries, prescribicg 
wholly different remedies for the same disorders. I won't pin 
my faith to any of them, ancient or modern. On the other 
hand, nothing can well be more deplorable than the proceeding 
of those fellows, ignorant as they are complaisant, who let their 
patients follow exactly their own fancies; 'tis these wretches 
who more especially people the graveyards. Able, cautious, 
and experienced physicians, are gifts of God. They are the 
ministers of nature, to whom human life is confided; but a 
moment's negligence may ruin everything. No physician 
should take a single step, but in humility and the fear of God; 
they who are without the fear of God are mere homicides. I 
expect that exercise and change of air do more good than all 
their purgings and bleedings, but when we do employ medical 
remedies, we should be careful to do so under the advice of a 
judicious physician. See what happened to Peter Lupinus, 
who died from taking internally a mixture designed for ex» 
ternal application. I remember hearing of a great law-suit, 
arising out of a dose of appium being given instead of a dose 
of opium. 

DCCLXXXIV. 

'Tis a curious thing that certain remedies, which, applied 
by princes and great lords, are efficacious and curative, are 
wholly powerless when administered by a physician. I have 
heard that the electors of Saxony, John and Frederic, have 



318 LUTHER S TABLE-TALK. 

a water, which cures diseases of the eye, when they them 
selves apply it, whether the disorder arise from heat or from 
cold; but 'tis quite useless when administered by a physician. 
So in spiritual matters, a preacher has more unction, and 
produces more effect upon the conscience than can a layman. 



OF DEATH. 

DCCLXXXV. 

To die for the sake of Christ's word, is esteemed precious 
and glorious before God. We are mortal, and must die for 
the sake of our sins, but when we die for the sake of Christ 
and his word, and freely confess them, we die an honourable 
death; we are thereby made altogether holy relics, and have 
sold our hides dear enough. But when we Christians pray 
for peace and long life, 'tis not for our sake, to whom death 
is merely gain, but for the sake of the church, and of pos- 
terity. 

The fear of death is merely death itself; he who abolishes 
that fear from the heart, neither tastes nor feels death. A 
human creature lying asleep is very like one that is dead; 
whence the ancients said, sleep is the brother of death. In 
like manner, life and death are pictured to us in the day and 
night, and in the change and alteration of the seasons. 

The dream I had lately, will be made true; 'twas that I 
was dead, and stood by my grave, covered with rags. Thus 
am I long since condemned to die, and yet I live. 

DCCLXXXVI. 

" Whoso keepeth my saying, shall never see death." Luther 
expounded this passage of St. John thus: We must die and 
suffer death, but whoso holds on God's Word, shall not feel 
death, but depart as in a sleep, and concerning him it shall 
not be said: " I die, but I am forced to sleep." On the other 
hand, whoso finds not himself furnished with God's Word, 
must die in anguish; therefore, when thou comest to die, 
make no dispute at all, but from thy heart say: I believe in 
Jesus Christ the Son of God; I ask no more. 



OF DEATH. 319 

DCCLXXXVir. 

One's thirty -eighth year is an evil and dangeious year, 
bringing many heavy and great sicknesses; naturally, by 
reason, perhaps, of the comets and conjunctions of Saturn 
and of Mars, but spiritually, by reason of the innumerable 
sins of the people. 

DCCLXXXVIII. 

Pliny, the heathen writer, says, book xx. cap. 1 : The best 
physic for a human creature is, soon to die; Julius Cassar 
contemned death, and was careless of danger; he said: 'Tis 
better to die once than continually to be afraid of dying; this 
was well enough for a heathen, yet w^e ought not to tempt 
God, but to use the means ^vhich he gives, and then commit 
ourselves to his mercy. 

It were a light and easy matter for a Christian to over- 
come death, if he knew it was not God's wrath; that quality 
makes death bitter to us. But a heathen dies securely; he 
neither sees nor feels that it is God's wrath, but thinks it is 
merely the end of nature. The epicurean says: 'Tis but to 
endure one evil hour. 

DCCLXXXIX. 

When I hear that a good and godly man is dead, I am 
affrighted, and fear that God hates the world, and is taking 
away the upright and good, to the end he may fall upon and 
punish the wicked. Though I die, it makes no great matter; 
for I am in the pope's curse and excommunication; I am his 
devil, therefore he hates and persecutes me. At Coburg, I 
went about, and sought me out a place for my grave; I 
thought to have been laid in the chancel under the table, but 
now I am of another mind. I know I have not long to live, 
for my head is like a knife, from which the steel is wholly 
whetted away, and which is become mere iron; the iron will 
cut no more, even so it is with my head. Now, loving Lord 
God, I hope my time is not far hence; God help me, and give 
me a happy hour; I desire to live no longer. 

DCCXC. 

We read of St. Vincent, that, about to die, and seeing 
death at his feet, he said: Death! what wilt thou? Thinkest 
thou to gain anything of a Christian? Knowest thou not 



320 Luther's table-talk. 

that 1 am a Christian? Even so ohould we learn to contemn, 
scorn, and deride death. Likewise, it is written in the 
history of St. Martin, that being near his death, he saw the 
devil standing at his bed's feet, and boldly said: Why standest 
thou there, thou horrible beast? thou hast nothing to do with 
me. These were right words of faith. Such and the like 
ought we to cull out of the legends of the saints, wholly 
omitting the fooleries that the papists have stuffed therein 

DCCXCI. 

Luther, at Wittenberg, seeing a very melancholy man, 
said to him: Ah! human creature, what dost thou? Hast 
thou nothing else in hand but to think of thy sins, on death, 
and damnation? Turn thine eyes quickly away, and look 
hither to this man Christ, of whom it is written: "He was 
conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, 
suffered, died, buried, descended into hell, the third day arose 
again from the dead, and ascended up into heaven," &c. 
Dost think all this was done to no end? Comfort thysell 
against death and sin; be not afraid, nor faint, for thou hast 
no cause; Christ suffered death for thee, and prevailed for thy 
comfort and defence, and for that cause he sits at the rigtit 
hand of God, his heavenly Father, to deliver thee. 

DCCXCII. 

So many members as we have, so many deaths have we. 
Death peeps out at every limb. The devil, a causer and lord 
of death, is our adversary, and hunts after our life: he has 
sworn our death, and we have deserved it; but the devil will 
not gain much by strangling the godly; he will crack a 
hollow nut. Let us die, that so the devil may be at rest. I 
have deserved death twofold; first, in that I have sinned 
against God, for which I am heartily sorry; secondly, I have 
deserved death at the devil's hands, whose kingdom of lying 
and murdering, through God's assistance, grace, and mercy, 
I have destroyed; therefore he justly wishes my death. 

DCCXCIII. 

" There shall arise ialse prophets, insomuch that, if it were 
possible, they shall deceive the very elect." This sentence 
was fulfilled, in the fathers; as in Jerome, Augustin, Gregory, 



OF DEATH. 321 

Bernard, and others; they were seduced into error,-, but 
remained not therein. St. Bernard wrote many evil and 
ungodly things, especially concerning the Virgin Mary; but 
when he was near his death, he said: " I have lived wickedly. 
Thou, loving Lord Jesus Christ, hast a twofold right to 
the kingdom of heaven; first, it is thine inheritance, for thou 
art the only begotten Son of the Father; this affords me no 
comfort or hope of heaven. But, secondly, thou hast pur- 
chased the same with thy suffering and death; thou hast 
stilled the Father's wrath, hast unlocked heaven, and pre- 
sented the same unto me as thy purchased good; of this have 
I joy and comfort." Therefore he died well and happy. 
Likewise when St. Augustin was to die, he prayed the seven 
penitential psalms. When these fathers were in health, they 
thought not on this doctrine; but when they were upon their 
death-beds, they found in their hearts what they were to 
trust to; they felt it high time to abandon human fopperies, 
and to betake themselves only to Christ, and to rely upon his 
rich and precious merits. 

DCCXCIV. 

Almighty, everlasting God, merciful he-'venJy Father, 
Father of our loving Lord Jesus Christ, I know assuredly, 
that everything which thou hast said, thou wilt and canst 
perform, for thou canst not lie; thy Word is upright and 
true. In the beginning, thou didst promise unto me thv 
loving and only begotten Son Jesus Christ; the same is come, 
and has delivered me from the devil, from death, hell, and 
sin. Out of his gracious will he has presented unto me the 
sacraments, which I have used in faith, and have depended 
on thy word; wherefore I make no doubt at all, but that I am 
well secured, and settled in peace; therefore if this be my 
hour, and thy divine will, so am I willing to depart hence 
with joy. 

DCCXCV. 

The school of faith is said to go about with death. Death 
is swallowed up in victory. If death, then sin. If death, 
then all diseases. If death, then all misery. If death, then all 
the power of the devil. If death, then all the fury of the world- 

But these things do not appear, but rather the contrary; 
therefore there is need of faith ; for an open manifestation of 

Y 



3?2 Luther's table-talk. 

things follows faith in due time, when the things, now invi- 
sible, will be seen. 

DCCXCVI. 

When Aclain lived, that is, when he sinned, death de- 
voured life; when Christ died, that is, was justified, then life, 
which is Christ, swallowed up and devoured death; therefore 
God be praised, that Christ died, and has got the victory. 



OF THE RESURRECTION. 

DCCXCVII. 

On Easter Sunday, 1544, Luther made an excellent sermon 
on the resurrection from the dead, out of the epistle appointed 
for that day, handling this sentence: " Thou fool, that which 
thou sowest is not quickened except it die." When Abraham 
intended to sacrifice his son, he believed that God out of the 
ashes would raise him again, and make him a father of 
children. The faith of Adam and of Eve preserved them, 
because they trusted and believed in the promised seed. For 
to him that believes everything is possible. The conception 
and birth of every human creature, proceeding out of a drop 
of blood, is no less a miracle and wonder-work of God, than 
that Adam was made out of a clod of earth, and Eve out of 
a fleshy rib. The world is full of such works of wonder, 
but we are blind, and cannot see them. The whole world is 
not able to create one member, no, not so much as a small 
leaf. The manner of the resurrection consists in these words: 
"Arise, come, stand up, appear, rejoice ye which dwell in the 
dust of the earth." I shall arise again, and shall speak with 
you; this finger wherewith I point must come to me again; 
everything must come again; for it is written: "God will 
create a new heaven and a new earth, wherein righteousness 
shall dwell." It will be no arid waste, but a beautiful new 
earth, where all the just will dwell together. There will be 
no carnivorous beasts, or venomous creatures, for all such, 
like ourselves, will be relieved from the curse of sin, and will 
be to us as IViendly as they were to Adam in Paradise. There 
will be little dogs, with golden hair, shining like precious 
stones. The foliage of the trees, and the verdure of the 
grass, will have the brilliancy of emeralds; and we ourselves, 



OF THE RESURRKCTIOX. 323 

delivered from our mundane subjection to gross appetites and 
necessities, shall have the same form as here, but infinitely 
more perfect. Our eyes will be radiant as the purest silver, 
and we shall be exempt from all sickness and tribulation. 
"We shall behold the glorious Creator face to face; and then, 
what ineffable satisfaction will it be to find on.r relations and 
friends among the just! If w^e Avere all one here, w^e should 
have peace among ourselves, but God orders it otherwise, t(» 
the end we may yearn and sigh after the future paternal 
home, and become weary of this troublesome life. Now, if 
there be joy in the chosen, so must the highest sorrow and 
despair be in the damned. 

DCCXCVIII. 

Tli'j 7th of August, 1538, Luther discoursed concerning 
the life to come, and said: In my late sickness I lay very 
weak, and committed myself to God, when many things fell 
into my mind, concerning the everlasting life, what it is, 
what joys we there shall have, and I was convinced that 
everything shall be revealed, which through Christ is pre- 
sented unto us, and is already ours, seeing we believe it. 
Here on earth we cannot know what the creation of the new 
world shall be, for we are not able to comprehend or under- 
stand the creation of this temporal world, or of its creatures, 
which are visible and corporal. The joys that are everlasting 
are beyond the comprehension of any human creature. As 
Isaiah says: '• Ye shall be everlastingly joyful in glorious joy" 
But how comes it that w^e cannot believe God's Word, seeing 
that all things are accomplished which the Scripture speaks 
touching the resurrection of the dead? This proves orio-inal 
sin as the cause of it. The ungodly and damned at the last 
day shall be under the ground, but in some measure shall 
behold the great joys and glory of the chosen and saved, and 
thereby shall be so much the more pained and tormented. \ 

Has our Lord God created this evanescent and temporal 
kingdom, the sky, and earth, and all that is therein, so fair; 
how much more fair and glorious will he, then, make yonder 
celestial everlasting kingdom. 

DCCXCIX. 

When I lay sucking at my mother's breasts, I had no 
notion how I should afterwTirds eat, drink, or live. Even so 
we on earth have no idea what the life to come will be. 

Y 2 



321 Luther's table-talk. 

DCCC. 

T hold the gnashing of teeth of the damned to be an ex- 
ternal pain following upon an evil conscience, that is, despair, 
when men see themselves abandoned by God. 

DCCCI. 

I wish from my heart Zuinglius could be saved, but I fear 
the contrary; for Christ has said, that those who deny him 
shall be damned. God's judgment is sure and certain, and 
we may safely pronounce it against all the ungodly, unless 
God reserve unto himself a peculiar privilege and dispensa- 
tion. Even «o, David from his heart wished that his son 
Absalom might be saved, when he said: ''Absalom my son, 
Absalom my son," yet he certainly believed that he was 
damned, and bewailed him, not only in that he died corporally, 
but was also lost everlastingly; for he knew that he died in 
rebellion, in incest, and that he had hunted his father out of 
the kingdom. 

DCCCII. 

The Fathers made four sorts of hell. 1. ihe fore-front, 
wherein, they say, the patriarchs were until Christ descended 
into hell. 2. The feeling of pain, yet only temporal, as pur- 
gatory. 3. Where unbaptized children are, but feel no pain. 
4. Where the damned are, which feel everlasting pain. This 
is the right hell; the other three are only human imaginings. 
In Popedom they sang an evil song: " Our sighs called upon 
thee, our pitiful lamentations sought thee," &c. This was not 
Christianlike, for the gospel says: " They are in Abraham's 
bosom." Isaiah: " They go into their chambers;" and Ec- 
clesiasticus: " The righteous is in the Lord's hand, let him 
die how he will, yea, although he be overtaken by death." 
What hell is^ we know not; only this we know, that there is 
such a sure and certain place, as is written of the rich glutton, 
when Abraham said unto him: " There is a great space 
between you and us." 

DCCCIII. 

Ah! loving God, defer not thy coming. I await impatiently 
the day when the spring shall return, when dey and night 
shall be of equal length, and when Aurora shall be clear and 
bright. One dav will come a thick black cloud out of which 



OF THE RESURRECTION. 325 

Will issue tliree flashes of lightning, and a chip of thunder will 
be heard, and, in a moment, heaven and earth will be covered 
with confusion. The Lord be praised, who has taught us to 
sigh and yearn after that day. In Popedom they are all 
afraid thereof, as is testified by their hymn, Dies irce dies 
ilia. I hope that day is not f-r off. Christ says : " At that 
time, ye shall scarcely find faith on the earth." If we make 
an account, we shall find, that we have the gospel now only 
in a corner. Asia and Africa have it not, the gospel is not 
preached in Europe, in Greece, Italy, Hungary, Spain, 
France, England, or in Poland, And this little corner where 
it is, Saxony, will not hinder the coming of the last day of 
judgment. The predictions of the apocalypse are accomplished 
already, as far as the white horse. The world cannot stand 
long, perhaps a hundred years at the outside. 

When the Turk begins to decline, then the last day will be 
at hand, for then the testimony of the Scripture must be 
verified. The loving Lord will come, as the Scripture says; 
" For thus saith the Lord of Hosts, yet a little while and I 
will shake the heavens and the earth, and the sea and the dry 
land: and I will shake all nations, and the desire of all nations 
shall come." At the last there will be great alteration and 
commotion; and already there are great commotions among 
men. Never had the men of law so much occupation as now. 
There are vehement dissensions in our families, and discord 
in the church. 

DCCCIV. 

About the time of Easter in April, when they least of all 
feared rain, Pharaoh was swallowed up in the Red Sea, and 
the nation of Israel delivered from Egypt. 'Twas at about 
the same time the world was created; at the same time the 
year is changed, and at the same time Christ arose again to 
renew the world. Perchance the last day will come about 
the same time. I am of opinion it will be about Easter, wdien 
the year is finest and fairest, and early in the morning, at 
sunrise, as at the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah. The 
elements will be gloomy with earthquakes and thunderings 
about an hour or a little longer, and the secure people will say: 
" Pish, thou fool, hast thou never heard it thunder?" 



326 Luther's table-talk. 

DCCCV. 

The science of alcbymy I like very well, and, indeed, 'tis 
the philosophy of the ancients. I like it not only for the 
profits it brings in melting metals, in decocting, preparing, 
extracting, and distilling herbs, roots; I like it also for the 
sake of the allegory and secret signification, which is exceed- 
ingly fine, touching the resuri-ection of the dead at the last 
day. For, as in a furnace the fire extracts and separates 
from a substance the other portions, and carries upward the 
spirit, the life, the sap, the strength, while the unclean matter, 
tlie dregs, remain at the bottom, like a dead and w^orthless 
carcass; even so God, at the day of judgment, will separate 
all things tlirough fire, the righteous from the ungodly. The 
Christians and righteous shall ascend upwards into heaven, 
and there live everlastingly, but the wicked and the ungodly, 
as the dross and filth, shall remain in hell, and there be 
damned. 



OF ALLEGORIES. 



DCCCVI. 



Allegories and spiritual significations, when applied to faith, 
and that seldom, are laudable; but when they are drawn 
fi-om the life and conversation, they are dangerous, and. 
when men make too many of tliem, pervert the doctrine of 
faith. Allegories are fine ornaments, but not of proof. AYe 
ought not lightly to make use of them, except the principal 
cause be first sufficiently proved, with strong grounds and 
arguments, as with St. Paul in the fourth chapter to Gala- 
tians. The body is the logic, but allegory the rhetoric; now 
rhetoric, which adorns and enlarges a thing with words, is of 
no value without logic, w^iich roundly and briefly comprehends 
a matter. When with rhetoiic men will make many words, 
without ground, it is but a trimmed thing, a carved idol. 

Dcccvn. 

An allegory is when a thing is signified and understood 
otherwise than as the words express. Of all languages, 



OF ALLEGORIES. 327 

none is so rich in allegories as the Hebrew, The German 
tongue is full of metaphors, as when Ave saj: He hangs the 
cloak according to the wind: — Katherine von Borna is the 
morning star of Wittenberg, and so on. These are meta- 
phors, that is, figurative words. Allegories are, as when 
Christ commands that one should wash another's feet, of 
baptizing, of the sabbath, &c. 

We must not hold and understand allegories as they sound; 
as what Daniel says, concerning the beast with ten horns; this 
\we must understand to be spoken of the Roman empire. 
Even so, circumcision in the New Testament is an allegory, 
but in the Old Testament it is no allegory. The New Tes- 
tament frames allegories out of the Old, as it makes two 
nations out of Abraham's sons. 

DCCCVIII. 

The legend of St. George has a fine spiritual signification, 
concerning temporal government and policy. The virgin 
signifies the policy; she is vexed and persecuted by the dragon, 
the devil, who goes about to devour lier; now he plagues her 
with hunger and dearth, then with pestilence, now with wars, 
till at length a good prince or potentate comes, wlio helps 
and delivers her, and restores her again to her right. 

DCCCIX. 

To play with allegories in Christian doctrine, is dangerous. 
The words, now and then, sound well and smoothly, but they 
are to no purpose. They serve vv^ell ic;r such preachers as 
have not studied much, who know not rightly how to ex- 
pound the histories and texts, whose leather is too short, 
and will not stretch. These resort to allegories, wherein 
nothing is taught certainly on which a man may build; there- 
fore, we should accustom ourselves to remain by the clear 
and pure text. Philip Melancthon asked Luther what the 
allegory and hidden signification was, that the eagle, during 
the time he broods and sits upon the eggs, hunts not abroad; 
and that he keeps but one young, thrustmg any others out of 
the nest. Likewise, why the ravens nourish not their young, 
but forsake them when they are yet bare, and without 
feathers? Luther answered: " The eagle signifies a monarch, 
who alone will have the government, and suffer none besides 



328 Luther's table-talk. 

himself to be his equal. The ravens are the harsh and hard- 
hearted swine and belly -gods, the papists. 

DCCCX. 

The allegory of a sophist is always screwed; it crouches 
and bows itself like a snake, w^hichis never straight, whether 
she go, creep, or lie still; only when she is dead, she is 
straight enough. 

DCCCXI. 

When I was a monk, I was much versed in spiritual signi- 
fications and allegories. 'Tvvas all art with me; but after- 
wards, when through the epistle to the Romans, I had come 
a little to the knowledge of Christ, I saw that all allegories 
were vain, except those of Christ. Before that time I turned 
everything into allegory, even the lowest wants of our nature. 
But afterwards I reflected upon historical facts. I saw 
how difiicult a matter it was for Gideon to have fought the 
enemy, in the manner shown by the Scripture; there was 
no allegory there or spiritual signification; the Holy Ghost 
simply says, that Faith only, with three hundred men, beat so 
great a multitude of enemies." St. Jerome and Origen, God 
forgive them, were the cause that allegories were held in 
such esteem. But Origen altogether is not worth one word 
of Christ. Now I have shaken off all these follies, and my 
best art is to deliver the Scripture in the simple sense; 
therein is life, strength, and doctrine; all other methods are 
nothing but foolishness, let them shine how they will. 'Twas 
thus Munzer troped with the third chapter of John: " Un- 
less one be born again of water," and said: Water signifies 
tribulation; but St. Augustin gave us the true rule, that 
figures and allegories prove nothing. 

DCCCXII. 

Few of the legends are pure; the legends of the martyrs 
are least corrupted, who proved their faith by the testimony 
of their blood. The legends of the hermits, who dwell in 
solitudes, are abominable, full of lying miracles and fooleries, 
touching moderation, chastity, and nurture. I hold in con- 
sideration the saints whose lives were not marked by any 
particular circumstances, who, in fact, lived like other people, 
and did not seek to make themselves noted. 



OF ALLEGORIES. 829 

DCCCXIII. 

In the legend of the virgin TecLa, who, as they say, was 
baptized by St. Paul, 'tis said " she awakened in him carnal 
desire." Ah! loving Paul, thou hadst another manner of 
thorn in thy flesh than carnal. The friars, w^ho live at their 
ease, and jollity, dream, according to their licentious cogita- 
tions, that St. Paul was plagued with the same tribulations f\a 
themselves. 

DCCCXIV. 

The legend of St. Christopheris no history, but a fiction com- 
posed by the Greeks, a wise, learned, and imaginative people, 
in order to show what life that of a true Christian should 
be. They figure him a very great, tall and strong man, who 
bears the child Jesus upon his shoulders, as the name Chris- 
topher indicates; but the child was heavy, so that he who 
carries him is constrained to bend under the burden. He 
traverses a raging and boisterous sea, the world, whose waves 
beat upon him, namely, tyrants, and factions, and the 
devil, who would fain bereave him of soul and life; but he 
supports himself by a great tree, as upon a staff; that is, 
Grod's Word. On the other side of the sea stands an old 
man, with a lanthorn, in which burns a candle; this means 
the writings of the prophets. Christopher directs his steps 
thither, and ;irrives safely on shore, that is, at everlasting 
life. At his side is a basket, containing fish and bread; 
this signifies that God will here on earth nourish the bodies 
of his Christians, amid the persecutions, crosses, and misfor- 
tunes which they must endure, and will not suffer them to 
die of hunger, as the world would have them. 'Tis a fine 
Christian poem, and so is the legend of St. George; George, 
in the Greek, means a builder, that builds edifices justly and 
with regularity, and who resists and drives away the enemies 
that would assault and damage them. 

DCCCXV. 

'Tis one of the devil's proper plagues that we have no good 
legends of the saints, pure and true. Those we have are stuffed 
so full of lies, that, without heavy labour, they cannot be 
corrected. The legend of St. Catherine is contrary to all the 
Roman history; for Maxentius was drowned in the Tiber at 



330 Luther's table-talk. 

Rome, and never came to Alexandria, but Maximian had 
been there, as we read in Eusebius, and after the time of Julius 
Caesar there had been no king in Egypt. He that disturbed 
Christians with such lies, was doubtless a desperate wretch, 
who surely has been plunged deep in hell. Such monstrosities 
did we believe in Popedom, but then we understood them 
not. Give Grod thanks, ye that are freed and delivered from 
them and from still more ungodly things. 



OF SPIRITUAL AND CHURCH LIVINGS. 

DCCCXVI. 

My advice is that the sees of the protestant bishops be per- 
mitted to remain, for the profit and use of poor students and 
schools; and when a bishop, dean, or provost, cannot, or will 
not preach himself, then he shall, at his own charge, main- 
tain other students and scholars, and permit them to study 
and preach. But when potentates and princes take spiritual 
livings to themselves, and will famish poor students and 
scholars, then the parishes of necessity must be wasted, as is 
the case already, for we can get neither ministers nor deacons. 
The pope, although he be our mortal enemy, must maintain 
us, yet against his will, and for which he has no thanks. 

DCCCXVII. 

These times are evil, in that the church is so spoiled and 
robbed by the princes and potentates; they give nothing, but 
■take and steal. In former times they gave liberally to her, 
now they rob her. The church is more torn and tattered 
than a beggar's cloak; nothing is added to the stipends of the 
poor servants of the church. They who bestow them to the 
right use are persecuted, it going with them as with St. Law- 
rence, who, against the emperor's command, divided the 
church livings among the poor. 

DCCCXVIII. 

The benefices under Popedom are unworthy that Chris- 
tian use should be made of them, for they are the wages of 



OF SPIRITUAL AND CHURCH LIVINGS. 331 

strumpets, as the prophet says, and shall return to such again. 
The pope is fooled, in that he suffers the emperor and other 
princes to take possession of spiritual livings; he hopes 
thereby to preserve his authority and power. For this reason 
he wrote to Henry of England, that he might take possession 
of spiritual livings, provided he, the popC; were acknowledged, 
by the king, chief bishop. For the pope thinks: I must now, 
in these times of trouble and danger, court the beast; I must 
yield in some things. Ah! how I rejoice that I have lived 
to see the pope humbled; he is now constrained to suter 
his patrons, his protectors, and defenders, to take possession 
of church livings to preserve his power, but he stands lik^ a 
tottering wall, about to be overthrown. How will it be with 
the monasteries and churches that are fallen down and de- 
ceiyed? They shall never be raised up again, and the pro- 
phecy will be fulfilled. Popedom has been and will be a 
prey. Twelve years since, the pope suffered one prince to 
take possession of divers bishoprics; afterwards, at the 
imperial diet at Augsburg, the prince was compelled to re- 
store them; now the pope gives him them again: this prince 
and his retinue may well forsake the gospel, seeing the pope 
yields so much to him. 'Tis a very strange time, and of 
which we little thought twenty years past, to see the pope, 
that grizly idol, of whom all people stood in fear, now per- 
mitting princes to contemn and scorn him, him whom the 
emperor dared not, thirty years past, have touched with but 
one word 

DCCCXIX. 

'Tis quite fitting a poor student should have a spiritual 
living to maintain his study, so that he bind not himself with 
ungodly and unchristianlike vows, nor consent to hold com- 
munion with the errors of the papists. Ah, that we might 
have but the seventh part of the treasure of the church, to 
maintain poor students in the church. I am sorry our princes 
have such desire for bishoprics; I fear they will be their 
bane, and that they will lose what is their own. 

DCCCXX. 

Cannons and fire-arms are cruel and damnaV)le machines, 
I believe them to have been the direct suggestion of the devil. 
Against the flying ball no valour avails; the soldier is dead, 



332 Luther's table-talk. 

ere he sees the means of his destruction. If Adam had seen 
in a vision the horrible instruments his children were to in- 
vent, he would have died of grief. 

DCCCXXL 

War is one of the greatest plagues that can afflict humanity; 
it destroys religion, it destroys states, it destroys families. 
Any scourge, in fact, is preferable to it. Famine and pes- 
tilence become as nothing in comparison with it. Pestilence 
is the least evil of the three, and 'twas therefore David chose 
it, willing rather to fall into the hands of God than into those 
of pitiless man. 

DCCCXXIL 

Some one asked, what was the difference between Samson 
the strong man, and Julius Caesar, or any other celebrated 
general, endowed at once with vigour of body and vigour of 
mind? Luther answered* Samson's strength was an effect of 
the Holy Ghost animating him, for the Holy Ghost enables 
those who serve God with obedience to accomplish great 
things. The strength and the grandeur of soul of the heathen 
was also an inspiration and work of God, but not of the kind 
which sanctifies. I often reflect with admiration upon Samson; 
mere human strength could never have done what he did. 

Dcccxxm. 

How many fine actions of the old time have remained un- 
known, tor want of an historian to record them. The Greeks 
and Romans alone possessed historians. Even of Livy, we 
have but a portion left to us; the rest is lost, destroyed. 
Sabellicus proposed to imitate and continue Livy, but he 
accomplished nothing. 

Victories and good fortune, and ability in war, are given 
by God, as we find in Hannibal, that famous captain, who 
hunted the Romans thoroughly, driving them out of Africa, 
Sicily, Spain, France, and almost out of Italy. I am per- 
suaded he was a surpassing valiant man; if he had but had a 
scribe to have written the history of his wars, we should, 
doubtless have known many great and glorious actions of his. 

DCCCXXIV. 

Great people and champions are special gifts of God, whom 
he gives and preserves: they do their work, and achieve 



OF CONSTRAINED DEFENCE. 333 

great actions, not with vain imaginations, or cold and sleepy 
cogitations, but by motion of God. Even so 'twas with the 
prophets, St. Paul, and other excelling people, who accom- 
plished their work by God's special grace. The Book of 
Judges also shows how God wrought great matters through 
one single person. 

DCCCXXV. 

Every great champion is not fitted to govern; lie that is a 
soldier, looks only after victories, how he may prevail, and 
keep the field; not after policy, how people and countries 
may be well governed. Yet Scipio, Hannibal, Alexander, 
Julius and Augustus Caesars looked also after government, 
and how good rule might be observed. 

DCCCXXVI. 

A valiant and brave soldier seeks rather to preserve one 
citizen, than to destroy a thousand enemies, as Scipio the 
Roman said; therefore an upright soldier begins not a war 
lightly, or without urgent cause. True soldiers and captains 
make not many words, but when they speak, the deed is done. 

DCCCXXVII. 

They who take to force, give a great blow to the gospel, 
and offend many people; they fish before the net, &c. The 
prophet Isaiah, and St. Paul say: "I will grind him (anti- 
christ) to powder with the rod of my mouth, and will slay him 
with the spirit of my lips." With such weapons we must 
beat the pope. Popedom can neither be destroyed nor pre- 
served by force; for it is built upon lies; it must, therefore 
be turned upside down and destroyed with the word of 
truth. It is said: "Preach thou, I will give strength." 



OF CONSTRAINED DEFENCE. 

DCCCXXVIII. 

The question whether without offending God or our con- 
science, we may defend ourselves against the emperor, if he 
should seek to subjugate us, is rather one for lawyers, than 
for divines. 



384 Luther's table-talk. 

If the emperor proceed to war upon us, he intends either to 
destroy our preaching, and our religion, or to invade and con- 
found public policy and economy, that is to say, the temporal 
government and administration. In either case, 'tis no lon^^er 
as emperor of the Romans, legally elected, we are to regard 
him but as a tyrant; 'tis, therefore, futile to ask whether we 
may combat for the upright, pure doctrine, and for religion; 
'tis for us a law and a duty to combat for wife, for children, 
servants, and subjects; we are bound to defend them against 
maleficent power. 

If I live I will write an admonition to all the states of the 
Christian Avorld, concerning our forced defence; and will show 
that every one is obliged to defend him and his against wrong- 
ful power. First, the emperor is the head of the body politic 
in the temporal kingdom, of which body, every subject and 
private person is a piece and member, to whom the right of 
enforced defence appertains, as to a temporal and civil person; 
for if he defend not himself, he is a slayer of his own body. 

Secondly, the emperor is not the only monarch or lord in 
Germany; but the princes electors are, together with him, 
temporal members of the empire, each of whom is charged 
and bound to take care of it; the duty of every prince is to 
further the good thereof, and to resist such as would injure and 
prejudice it. This is especially the duty of the leading head, 
the emperor. 'Tis true, the princes electors, though of equal 
power with the emperor, are not of equal dignity and pre- 
rogative; but they and the other princes of the empire are 
bound to resist the emperor, in case he should undertake any- 
thing tending to the detriment of the empire, or which is 
against God and lawful right. Moreover, if the emperor 
should proceed to depose any one of the princes electors, then 
he deposes them all, w^hich neither should, nor can be com- 
mitted. 

Wherefore, beiore we formally answer this question, 
whether the emperor may depose the princes electors, or 
whether they may depose the emperor; we must first clearly 
thus distinguish: a Christian is composed of two kinds of 
persons, namely, a believing or a spiritual person, and a civil 
or temporal person. The believing or spiritual person ought 
to endure and suffer all things; it neither eats, nor drinks, nor 
engenders children, nor has share or part in temporal doings 
and matters. But the temporal and civil person is subject 



OF CONSTRAINED DEFENCE. 335 

to the temporal rights and laws, and tied to obedience; it 
must maintain and defend itself, and what belongs to it, as the 
laws command. For example, if, in my presence, some wretch 
should attempt to do violence to my wife or my daughter, then 
I should lay aside the spiritual person, and recur to the tem- 
poral; I should slay him on the spot, or call for help. For, 
in the absence of the magistrates, and when they cannot be 
had, the law of the nation is in force, and permits us to call 
upon our neighbour for help; Christ and the gospel do not 
abolish temporal rights and ordinances, but confirm them. 

The emperor is not an absolute monarch, governing alone, 
and at his pleasure, but the princes electors are in equal 
power with him; he has, therefore, neither power nor autho- 
rity alone to make laws and ordinances, much less has he 
power, right, or authority to draw the sword for the sub- 
jugation of the subjects and members of the empire, without 
the sanction of the law, or the knowledge and consent of the 
whole empire. Therefore, the emperor Otho did wisely in 
ordaining seven princes electors, who, with the emperor, should 
rule and govern the empire; but for this, it would not so long 
have stood and endured. 

Lastly, we should know that when the emperor proposes 
to make war upon us, he does it not of and for himself, but for 
the interest of the pope, to whom he is liegeman, and whose 
tyranny and abominable idolatry he thus undertakes to main- 
tain; for the pope regards the gospel not at all, and in 
raising war against the gospel, by means of the emperor, intends 
only to defend and preserve his authority, power, and tyranny. 
We must not, then, remain silent and inactive. But here one 
may object and say: Although David had been by God chosen 
king, and anointed by Samuel, yet he would not resist king 
Saul, or lay hands upon him; neither ought we to resist the 
emperor, &c. Answer: David, at that time, had but the 
promise of his kingdom; he had it not in possession; he was 
not yet settled in his government. In our case, we arm not 
against Saul, but against Absalom, against whom David made 
war, slaying the rebel by the hands of Joab. 

I would willingly argue this matter at length, whether we 
may resist the emperor or no? though the jurisconsults, with 
their notions of temporal and natural rights, pronounce in the 
affirmative, for us divines 'tis a question of grave difficulty, 
having regard to these passages: " Whosoever shall smite thee 



336 LUTHER S TABLE-TALK. 

on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also." And: " Servants 
he subject to your masters with all fear, not only to the good 
and gentle, but also the froward." We must beware how we 
act against God's Word, lest, afterwards, in our consciences, 
we be plagued and tormented. But still, we are certain of 
one thing, that these times are not the times of the martyrs, 
when Diocletian reigned and raged against the Christians; 
'tis now another kind of kingdom and government. The 
emperor's authority and power, without the seven princes 
electors, is of no value. The lawyers write: the emperor has 
parted with the sword, and given it into our possession. He 
has over us but only gladium petitorium^ he must seek it of 
us, when he proposes to punish, for of right he can do nothing 
alone. If his government were as that of Diocletian, we 
would readily yield unto him and suffer. 

I hope the emperor will not make war upon us foithe pope's 
sake; but should he play the part of an Arian, and openly fight 
ao-ainst God's word, not as a Christian, but as a heathen, we 
are not bound to submit and suffer. 'Tis from the pope's 
side I take the sword, not from the emperor's; and the pope, 
'tis evident, ought to be neither master nor tyrant. 

To sum up: — 

First: the princes electors are not slaves. 

Secondly: The emperor rules upon certain conditions: 

Thirdly: He is sworn to the empire, to the princes electors, 
and other princes. 

Fourthly: He has by oath bound himself unto them, to pre- 
serve the empire in its dignity, honour, royalty, and juris- 
diction, and to defend every person in that which justly and 
rio^htly belongs to him; therefore, it is not to be tolerated that 
he should bring us into servitude and slavery. 

Fifthly : We are entitled to the benefit of the laws. 

Sixthly : He ought to yield to Christian laws and rights. 

Seventhly: Our princes by oath are bound to the empire, 
truly to maintain privileges and jurisdictions in politic and 
temporal cases, and not to permit any of these to be taken 
away. 

Eighthly: These cases are among equals, where one is 
neither more nor higher than another: therefore, if the 
emperor with tyranny deals contrary to equity and justice, he 
makes himself equal with others; for thereby he lays aside 



OF LAWYER?. 337 

the person of a governor and loses his right over the subjects, 
bj the nature of relatives; for princes and subjects are equally 
bound the one to the other, and a prince is clearly obliged to 
perform what he has sworn and promised, according to the 
proverb: Faithful master, faithful man. 

Ninthly: The laws are above a prince and tyrant; for the 
laws and ordinances are not wavering, but always sure and 
constant, while a human creature is wavering and inconstant, 
for the most part following his lusts and pleasures, if by the 
laws he be not restrained. 

If a robber on the highway should fall upon me, truly I 
would be judge and prince myself, and would use my sword, 
because nobody was with me, able to defend me; and I should 
think I had accomplished a good work; but if one fell upc;n 
me as a preacher for the gospel's sake, then with folded hands 
I would lift up mine eyes to heaven, and say: *' My Lord 
Christ! here I am; I have confessed and preached thee; is now 
my time expired? so I commit my spirit into thy hands," an(? 
in that way would I die. 



o> 



OK LAWYERS. 

DCCCXXIX. 

Two doctors in the law came to Luther at Wittenberg 
whom he received and saluted in this manner: ye canonists! 
I could well endure you, if ye meddled only with imperial, 
and not with popish laws. But ye maintain the pope and his 
canons. I would give one of m^y hands, on condition, all 
papists and canonists were compelled to keep the pope's laws 
and decrees; I would wish them no worse a devil. 

The bishop of Mayence cannot boast, that with a good con* 
science he has three bishoprics; but ye maintain it to be law- 
ful and right. Ye doctors who meddle with popish laws are 
nothing, for the popish laws are nothing, therefore a doctor 
in the popish laws is nothing; he is a chimera, a monster, a 
fable, nothing. A doctor in the imperial laws is half lame, he 
has had a stroke on the one side; the pope's laws and decrees 
altogether stink of ambition, of pride, of self-profit, covetous- 
ness, superstition, idolatry, tyranny, and such like blasphemies. 

z 



338 Luther's table-talk. 

DCCCXXX. 

Ye that are studying under lawyers, follow not your pre- 
ceptors in abuses or wrong cases, as if a man could not be a 
lawyer unless he practised such evil. God has not giren 
laws to make out of right wrong, and out of wrong right, as 
the unchristianlike lawyers do, who study law only for the 
sake of gain and profit. 

DCCCXXXI. 

Every lawyer is sorely vexed at me because I preach so 
harshly against the craft; but I say I, as a preacher, must 
reprove what is wrong and evil. If I reproved them, as Mar- 
tin Luther, they need not regard me, but forasmuch as 1 do 
it as a servant of Christ, and speak by God's command, they 
ought to hearken unto me; for if they repent not, they 
shall everlastingly be damned; but I, when I have declared 
their sins, shall be excused. If I were not constrained to 
give an account for their souls, I would leave them unre- 
proved. 

DCCCXXXII. 

All they that serve the pope are damned; for, next the 
devil, no worse creature is than the pope, with his lying 
human traditions, aimed directly against Christ. The greatest 
part of the lawyers, especially the canonists, are the pope's 
servants, and although they will not have the name, yet they 
prove it in deed. They would willingly rule the church, and 
trample upon her true and faithful servants; therefore are 
they damned. 



OF UNIVERSITIES, ARTS, ETC. 

DCCCXXXIII. 

A LAWYER is wise according to human wisdom, a divine 
according to God's wisdom. 

DCCCXXXIV. 

Ah! how bitter an enemy is the devil to our church and 
school here at Wittenberg, which in particular he opposes 
more than the rest, so that tyranny and heresy increase and 
get the upper hand by force, in that all the members of the 
church are against one another; yea, also we, which are a 
piece of the heart, vex and plague one another among our- 



OF UNIVERSITIES, ARTS, ETC. 339 

selves. I am verily persuaded that many wicked wretches 
and spies are here, who watch over us with an evil eye, and 
are glad when discord and offences arise among us; tlierefore 
we ought diligently to watch and pray; it is high time — pray, 
pray. This school is a foundation and ground of pure reli- 
gion, therefore she ought justly to be preserved and main- 
tained with lectures and with stipends against the raging and 
swelling of Satan. 

DCCCXXXV. 

Whoso after my death shall contemn the authority of this 
school here at AYittenberg, if it remain as it is now, church 
and school, is a heretic and a perverted creature; for in this 
school God first revealed and purified his word. This school 
and city, both in doctrine and manner of life, may j ustly be 
compared with all others; yet we are not altogether com- 
plete, but still faulty in our kind of living. The highest and 
chiefest divines in the whole empire hold and join with us — 
as Amsdorf, Brentius, and Rhegius — all desiring our friend- 
ship, and saluting us with loving and learned letters. A few 
years past, nothing was of any value but the pope, till the 
church mourned, cried, and sighed, and awakened our Lord 
God in heaven; as in the Psalm he says : " For the trouble 
of the needy and the groans of the poor, I will now arise." 

DCCCXXXVI. 

Our nobility exhaust people with usury, insomuch that 
many poor people starve for want of food; the cry goes, I 
would willingly take a wife, if I knew how to maintain her, 
so that a forced celibacy will hence ensue. This is not good; 
such wicked courses will cause the poor to cry and sigh, 
will rouse up God and the heavenly host. Wherefore I say: 
Germany, take heed. I often make an account, and as I 
come nearer and nearer to forty years, I think with myself: 
now comes an alteration, for St. Paul preached not above 
forty years, nor St. Augustin; always, after forty years 
pure preaching of God's Word, it has ceased, and great 
calamities have ensued thereupon. 

DCCCXXXVII, 

Dialectica speaks simply, straightforward, and plainly, as 
when I say: Give me something to drink. But Rhetorica 
adorns the matter, saying: Give me of the acceptable juice in 

z 2 



340 Luther's table-talk. 

the cellar, which finely froths and makes people merry. Dia* 
hcta declares a thing distinctly and significantly, in brief 
words. Rhetor ica counsels and advises, persuades and dis- 
suades; she has her place and fountain-head, whence a 
thing is taken; as, this is good, honest, prafitable, easy, neces- 
sary, &c. These two arts St. Paul briefly taught, where he 
says: " That he may be able by sound doctrine, both to ex- 
hort and to convince the gainsayers." (Tit. 1.) Therefore, 
-when I would teach a farmer concerning the tilling of his 
land, I define briefly and plainly, his kind of life; his house- 
keeping, fruits, profits, and all that belongs to the being of 
his life, Dialectice ; but, if I would admonish him, according 
to Rhetorica, then I counsel and advise him, and praise his 
kind of life, in this manner, as: that it is the most quiet, the 
richest, securest, and most delightful kind of life, &c. Again, 
if I intend to chide or to find fault, then I must point out and 
blame his misconduct, evil impediments, failings, gross igno- 
rance, and such like defects which are in the state of farmers. 
Philip Melancthon has illustrated and declared good arts: he 
teaches them in such sort, that the arts teach not him, but he 
the arts; I bring my arts into books, I take them not out of 
books. Dialectica is a profitable and necessary art, which 
justly ought to be studied and learned; it shows how we ought 
to speak orderly and uprightly, what we should acknowledge 
and judge to be right or wrong; 'tis not only necessary in 
schools, but also in consistories, in courts of justice, and in 
churches; in churches most especially. 

DCCCXXXVIII. 

I always loved music; whoso has skill in this art, is ol *l 
good temperament, fitted for all things. We must teach music 
in schools; a schoolmaster ought to have skill in music, or I 
would not regard him; neither should we ordain young men 
as preachers, unless they have been well exercised in music. 

DCCCXXXIX. 

Singing has nothing to do with the affairs of this world, it 
is not for the law; singers are merry and free from sorrow 
and cares. 

DCCCXL. 

Music is one of the best arts; the notes give life to the 
text; it expels melancholy, as we see in king Saul. Kings 



OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROLOGY. 341 

and princes ought to maintain music, for great potentates and 
rulers sliould protect good and liberal arts and laws; though 
private people have desire thereunto and love it, yet their 
ability is not adequate. We read in the Bible, that the good 
and godly kings maintained and paid singers. Music is the 
best solace for a sad and sorrowful mind; by it the heart is 
refreshed and settled again in peace. 



OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROLOGY. 

DCCCXLI. 

Astronomy is the most ancient of all sciences, and has been 
the introducer of vast knowledge; it was familiarly known to 
the Hebrews, for they diligently noted the course of the 
heavens, as God said to Abraham: "Behold the heavens; 
canst thou number the stars?" &c. Heaven's motions are 
threefold; the first is, that the whole firmament moves 
swiftly round, every moment thousands of leagues, which, 
doubtless, is done by some angel. 'Tis wonderful so great 
a vault should go about in so short a time. If the sun and 
stars were composed of iron, steel, silver, or gold, they must 
needs suddenly melt in so swift a course, for one star is 
greater than the whole earth, and yet they are innumerable. 
The second motion is, of the planets, which have their par- 
ticular and proper motions. The third is, a quaking or a 
trembling motion, lately discovered, but uncertain. I like 
astronomy and mathematics, which rely upon demonstra- 
tions and sure proofs. As to astrology, 'tis nothing. 

DCCCXLII. 

Astronomy deals with the matter, and with what is general, 
not with the manner or form. God himself will be alone the 
Master and Creator, Lord and Governor, though he has 
ordained the stars for signs. And so long as astronomy 
remains in her circle, whereunto God has ordained her, so 
is she a fair gift of God; but when she will step out of her 
bounds — that is, when she will prophecy and speak of future 
things, how it will go with one, or what fortune or misfortune 
another shall have, then she is not to be justified. Chiro- 
mancy we should utterly reject. In the stars is neither 



342 Luther's table-talk. 

strength nor operation ; thej are but signs, and have, there- 
fore, just cause to complain of the astrologers, who attribute 
unto them what they have not. The astrologers commonly 
ascribe that to the stars, which they ought to attribute to tne 
planets, that announce only evil events, except that star 
which appeared to the wise men in the east, and which 
showed that the revelation of the gospel was at the door. 

In the year 1538, the Seigneur Von Minckwitz made a 
public oration in honour of astrology, wherein he sought to 
prove that the sentence in Jeremiah, chap, x.: "Be not dis- 
mayed at the signs of heaven," applied not to astrology, but 
to the images of the Gentiles. Luther said hereupon: These 
passages may be quibbled w^ith, but not overthrown. Jere- 
miah speaks as Moses did of all the signs of heaven, earth, 
and sea; the heathen were not so silly as to be afraid of the 
sun or moon, but they feared and adored prodigies and mira- 
culous signs. Astrology is no art; it has no principle, no 
demonstration, w^hereupon we may take sure footing; 'tis 
all haphazard work ; Philip Melancthon, against his will, 
admits unto me, that though, as he says, the art is extant, 
there are none that understand it rightly. They set forth, 
in their almanacs, that we shall have no snow in summer 
time, nor thunder in winter; and this the country clowns 
know as well as the astrologers. Philip Melancthon says: 
That such people as are born in asce?ide7ite Libra, in the 
ascension of Liber towards the south, are unfortunate people. 
Whereupon I said: The astrologers are silly creatures, to 
dream that their crosses and mishaps proceed not from God, 
but from the stars; 'tis hence, they are not patient in their 
troubles and adversities. Astrology is uncertain; and as the 
predicame)ita are feigned words in Dialectica, even so astro- 
nomy has feigned astrology; as the ancient and true divines 
knew nothing of the fantasies and divinity of the school- 
teachers, so the ancient astronomers knew nothing of astro- 
logy. The nativities of Cicero and of others were shown 
me. I said: I hold nothing thereof, nor attribute any- 
thing unto them. I would gladly have the astrologers 
answer me this: Esau and Jacob were born together, of 
one father and one mother, at one time, and under equal 
planets, yet they were wholly of contrary natures, kinds, and 
minds. What is done by God, ought not to be ascribed to 



OF ASTRONOMY AND ASTROLOGY. 343 

the stars. The upright and true Christian religion opposes 
and confutes all such fables. The way of casting nativities is 
like the proceedings in Popedom, whose outward ceremonies 
and pompous ordinances are pleasing to human wit and 
wisdom, as the consecrated water, torches, organs, cymbals, 
singing, ringing, but withal there's no certain knowledge. 
An astrologer, or horoscope-monger, is like one that sells 
dice, and bawls: Behold, here I have dice that always come 
up twelve. If once or twice their conjectures tell, they 
cannot sufficiently extol the art; but as to the infinite cases 
where they fail, they are altogether silent. Astronomy, on 
the contrary, I like; it pleases me by reason of her manifold 
benefits. 

General prophecies and declarations, which declare gene- 
rally what in future shall happen, accord not upon indivi- 
duals and particular things. 

When at one time many are slain together in a battle, no 
man can affirm they were all born under one planet, yet they 
die altogether in one hour, yea, in one moment. 

DCCCXLIIl. 

God has appointed a certain and sure end for all things, 
otherwise Babylon might have said: I will remain and con- 
tinue; and Rome: To me is the government and rule given 
without ceasing. To Alexander and others were given em- 
pires and kingdoms, yet astrology taught not that such great 
kingdoms were to be raised, nor how long they were to last. 

Astrology is framed by the devil, to the end people may be 
scared from entering into the state of matrimony, and from 
every divine and human office and calling; for the star- 
peepers presage nothing that is good out of the planets; they 
affi'ight people's consciences, in regard of misfortunes to come, 
which all stand in God's hand, and through such mischievous 
and unprofitable cogitations vex and torment the whole life. 

Great wrong is done to God's creatures by the star-ex- 
pounders. God has created and placed the stars in the firma- 
ment, to the end they might give light to the kingdoms of 
the earth, make people glad and joyful in the Lord, and be 
good signs of years and seasons. But the star-peepers feign 
that those creatures, of God created, darken and trouble the 
earth, and are hurtful; whereas all creatures of God are 



344 Luther's table-talk. 

good, and by God created only for good, though mankind 
makes them evil, by abusing them. Eclipses, indeed, are 
monsters, and like to strange and untimely births. Lastly, 
to believe in the stars, or to trust thereon, or to be affrighted 
thereat, is idolatry, and against the first commandment. 



OF LEARNED MEN. 

DCCCXLIV. 

Luther advised all who proposed to study, in what art 
soever, to read some sure and certain books over and over 
again; for to read many sorts of books produces rather con- 
fusion than any distinct result; just as those that dwell every- 
where, and remain in no place, dwell nowhere, and have no 
home. As we use not daily the community of all our friends, 
but of a select few, even so we ought to accustom ourselves 
to the best books, and to make them familiar unto us, so as 
to have them, as we say, at our fingers' end. A fine talented 
student fell into a frenzy; the cause of his disease was, 
that he laid himself out too much upon books, and was 
in love with a girl. Luther dealt very mildly and friendly 
with him, expecting amendment, and said: Love is the cause 
of his sickness; study brought upon him but little of his 
disorder. Li the beginning of the gospel it went so with 
myself. 

DCCCXLV. 

Who could be so mad, in these evil times, as to write 
history and the truth? The brains of the Greeks were subtle 
and crafty; the Italians are ambitious and proud; the Ger- 
mans rude and boisterous. Livy described the acts of the 
Romans, not of the Carthaginians. Blandus and Platina 
only flatter the popes. 

DCCCXLVI.. 

Anno 1536, Luther wrote upon his tablets the following 
words: Res et verba Philippus; verba sine re Erasmus; res 
sine verbis Lutherus; nee res, nee verba Carolostadius ; that 
is, what Philip Melancthon writes has hands and feet; the 
matter is good, and the words are good; Erasmus Rotero- 



OF LEARNED MEN. 345 

damus writes many words, but to no purpose; Luther has 
good matter, but the words are wanting; Carlstad has neither 
good words nor good matter. Philip Melancthon coming in 
at the moment, read these criticisms, and turning with a 
smile to Dr. Basil, said: Touching Erasmus and Carlstad, 
'tw^as well said, but too much praise is accorded to me, while 
good words ought to be reckoned among the other merits of 
Luther, for he speaks exceeding well, and has substantial 
matter. 

DCCCXLVII. 

Luther, reproving Dr. Mayer, for that he was faint-hearted 
and depressed, by reason of his simple kind of preaching, in 
comparison with other divines, as he conceived, admonished 
him, and said: Loving brother, when you preach, regard not 
the doctors and learned men, but regard the common people, 
to teach and instruct them clearly. In the pulpit, we must 
feed the common people with milk, for each day a new church 
is growing up, which stands in need of plain and simple in- 
struction. Keep to the catechism, the milk. High and 
subtle discourse, the strong wine, we will keep for the strong 
minded. 

DCCCXLVIII. 

No theologian of our time handles and expounds the Holy 
Scripture so well as Brentius, so much so that I greatly 
admire his energy, and despair of equalling him. I verily 
believe none among us can compare with him in the expo- 
sition of St. John's gospel; though, now and then, he dwells 
somewhat too much upon his own opinions, yet he keeps to 
the true and just meaning, and does not set himself up against 
the plain simplicity of God's Word. 

DCCCXLIX. 

The discourse turning upon the great differences amongst 
the learned, Luther said: God has very finely distributed his 
gifts, so that the learned serve the unlearned, and the un- 
learned humble themselves before the learned, in what is 
needful for them. If all people were equal, the world could 
not go on; nobody would serve another, and there would be 
no peace. The peacock complained because he had not the 
nightingale's voice. God, with apparent inequality, has in- 
stituted the greatest equality; one man, who has greater gifts 



346 LUTHER S TABLE-TALK. 

than another, is proud and haughty, and seeks to rule and 
domineer over others, and contemns them. God finely illus- 
trates human society in the members of the body, and shows 
that one member must assist the other, and that none can be 
without the other. 

DCCCL. 

Aristotle is altogether an epicurean; he holds that God 
heeds not human creatures, nor regards how we live, permit- 
ting us to do at our pleasure. According to him, God rules 
the world as a sleepy maid rocks a child. Cicero got much 
further. He collected together what he found good in the 
books of all the Greek writers. 'Tis a good argument, and 
has often moved me much, w^here he proves there is a God, 
in that living creatures, beasts, and mankind engender their 
own likeness. A cow always produces a cow; a horse, a 
horse, &c. Therefore it follows that some being exists which 
rules everything. In God w^e may acknowledge the un- 
changeable and certain motion of the stars of heaven; the 
sun each day rises and sets in his place; as certain as time, 
we have winter and summer, but as this is done regularly, 
we neither admire nor regard it. 



OF THE JEWS. 

DCCCLI. 

The Jews boast they are Abraham's children; and, indeed, 
'twas a high honour for them, when the rich glutton in hell 
said, " Father Abraham," &c. But our Lord God can well 
distinguish these children ; for to such as the glutton he gives 
their wages here in this life, but the rewards and wages for 
the others he reserves until the life to come. 

DCCCLIL 

The Jews are the most miserable people on earth. They 
are plagued everywhere, and scattered about all countries, 
having no certain resting-place. They sit as on a wheelbarrow, 
without a country, people, or government; yet they wait on 
with earnest confidence; they cheer up themselves and say; 



OF THE JEWS. 347 

It will soon be better with us. Thus hardened are they; but 
let them know assaredly, that there is none other Lord or 
God, but only he that already sits at the right hand of God 
the Father. The Jews are not permitted to trade or to keep 
cattle, they are only usurers and brokers; they eat nothing 
the Christians kill or touch; they drink no wine; they have 
many superstitions; they wash the flesh most diligently, 
whereas they cannot be cleansed through the flesh. They 
drink not milk, because God said: " Thou shalt not boil the 
young kid in his mother's milk." Such superstitions proceed 
out of God's anger. They that are without faith, have laws 
without end, as we see in the papists and Turks; but they 
are rightly served, for seeing they refused to have Christ and 
his gospel, instead of freedom they must have servitude. 

If I were a Jew, the pope should never persuade me to his 
doctrine; I would rather be ten times racked. Popedom, with 
its abominations and profanities, has given to the Jews infinite 
offence. I am persuaded if the Jew^s heard our preaching, 
and how we handle the Old Testament, many of them might 
be won, but, through disputing, they have become more and 
more stifl*-necked, haughty, and presumptuous. Yet, if but 
a few of the rabbis fell off, we might see them come to us, one 
after another, for they are almost weary of waiting. 

DCCCLIII. 

At Frankfort on the Maine there are very many Jews; 
they have a whole street to themselves, of which every house 
is filled with them. They are compelled to wear little yellow 
rings on their coats, thereby to be known; they have no 
houses or grounds of their own, only furniture; and, indeed, 
they can only lend money upon houses or grounds at great 
hazard. 

DOCCLIV. 

I have studied the chief passages of Scripture, that consti- 
tute the grounds upon which the Jews argue against us; as 
where God said to Abraham: "I will make my covenant 
between me and thee, and with thy seed after thee, in their 
generations, for an everlasting covenant," &c. Here the 
Jews brag, as the papists do upon the passage: "Thou art 
Peter." I would willingly bereave the Jews of this bragging, 
by rejecting the Law of Moses, so that they should not be 



348 Luther's table-talk. 

able to gainsay me. We have against them the prophet 
Jeremiah, where he says: " Behold, the time cometh, saith 
the Lord, when I will make a new covenant with the house 
of Israel, and with the house of Judah, not as the covenant 
which I made with their fathers," &c. " But this shall be 
the covenant which I will make with the house of Israel; 
after this time, saith the Lord, I will give my laws into their 
hearts, and will write it in their minds," &c. 

Here, surely, the Jews must yield, and say: the law 
of Moses continued but for awhile, therefore it must be 
abolished. But the covenant of the circumcision, given 
before Moses' time, and made between God and Abraham, 
and his seed Isaac in his generation, they say, must and shall 
be an everlasting covenant, which they will not suffer to be 
taken from them. 

And though Moses himself rejects their circumcising of the 
flesh, and presses upon the circumcising of the heart, yet, 
nevertheless, they boast of that everlasting covenant out of 
God's Word; and when they admit that the circumcision 
justifies not, yet, nevertheless, say they, it is an everlasting 
covenant, thinking it is a covenant of works, therefore we 
must leave unto them their circumcision. 

I, for my part, with all God-fearing Christians, have this 
sure and strong comfort, that the circumcision w^as to continue 
but for awhile, until Messiah came; when he came, the com- 
mandment was at an end. Moses was wise; he kept himself 
within bounds, for in all his four books after Genesis, he 
wrote nothing of physical circumcision, but only of the cir- 
cumcision of the heart. He dwells upon the Sacrifices, the 
Sabbath, and show-bread; , but leaves this covenant of cir- 
cumcision quite out, making no mention thereof; as much 
as to say: "Lis little to be regarded. If it had been of such 
importance and weight as the Jews make it, he would doubt- 
less have urged it accordingly. Again, in the Book of Joshua, 
mention is made of the circumcising of the heart. The 
papists, however, blind people, w^ho know nothing at all of 
the Scriptures, are not able to confute one argument of the 
Jews; theirs is truly a fearful blindness. 

DCCCLV. 

The verse in the 1 15th Psalm is masterly: " He shall bless 
them that fear the Lord, both small and great." Here the 



OF THE JEWS. 349 

Holy Spirit is a fierce thunder-clap against the proud, boast- 
ing Jews and papists, who brag that they alone are God's 
people, and will allow of none but of those that are of their 
church. But the Holy Ghost says: The poor contemned 
people are also God's people, for God saved many of the Gen- 
tiles without the law and circumcision, as without Popedom. 
The Jews see not that Abraham was declared justified only 
through faith: Abraham beheved God, and that was imputed 
unto him for righteousness. God with circumcision contirmed 
his covenant with this nation, but only for a certain time. 
True, the circumcision of the Jews, before Christ's coming, 
had great majesty; but that they should affirm that without 
it none are God's people, is utterly untenable. The Jews 
themselves, in their circumcision, w^ere rejected of God. 

DCCCLVI. 

Christ drove the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, not 
by any temporal authority, but by the jurisdiction and power 
of the church, which authority every High Priest in the 
Temple had. The glory of this Temple was great, that the 
whole world must worship there. But God, out of special 
wisdom, caused this Temple to be destroyed, to the end the 
Jews might be put to confusion, and no more brag and boast 
thereof. 

DCCCLVII. 

There can be no doubt that of old time many Jews took 
refuge in Italy and Germany, and settled there. 

Cicero, the eloquent Gentile, complains of the superstition 
of the Jews, and their multitude in Italy; w^e find their foot- 
steps throughout Germany. Here, in Saxony, many names of 
places speak of them: Ziman, Damen, Resen, Sygretz, Schvitz, 
Pratha, Thablon. The Jews inhabited R-atisbon a long time 
before the birth of Christ. At Cremona there are but twenty- 
eight Christians. It was a mighty nation. 

DCCCLVIII. 

The Jews read our books, and thereout raise objections 
against us; 'tis a nation that scorns and blasphemes even as 
the lawyers, the papists, and adversaries do, taking out of 
our writings the knowledge of our cause, and using the same 
as weapons against us. But, God be praised, our cause has 



350 

a sure, good and steadfast ground, namely, God and hib 
Word. 

DCCCLIX. 

Two Jewish rabbis, named Schamaria and Jacob, came to 
me at Wittenberg, desiring of me letters of safe conduct, 
which I granted them, and they were well pleased; only they 
earnestly besought me to omit thence the word Tola, that is, 
Jesus crucified; for they must needs blaspheme the name 
Jesus. They said: 'Tis most wonderful that so many thou- 
sands of innocent people have been slaughtered, of whom no 
mention is made, while Jesus, the crucified, must always be 
remembered. 

DCCCLX. 

The Jews must be encountered with strong arguments, as 
where Jeremiah speaks touching Christ: "Behold, the days 
come, saith the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous 
branch, and a king shall reign and prosper, and shall execute 
judgment and justice in the earth; in his days Judah shall be 
saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, and this is his name 
whereby he shall be called. The Lord our Righteousness." 
This argument the Jews are not able to solve; yet if they 
deny that this sentence is spoken of Christ, they must 
show unto us another king, descended from David, who should 
govern so long as the sun and moon endure, as the promises 
of the prophets declare. 

DCCCLXI. 

Either God must be unjust, or you, Jews, wicked and un- 
godly; for ye have been in misery and fearful exile, a far 
.longer time than ye were in the land of Canaan. Ye had 
not the temple of Solomon more than three hundred years, 
while ye have been hunted up and down above fifteen hun- 
dred. At Babylon ye had more eminence than at Jerusalem, 
for Daniel was a greater and more powerful prince at Baby- 
lon than either David or Solomon at Jerusalem. The 
Babylonian captivity was unto you only a fatherly rod, but 
this last punishment was your utter extermination. You 
have been, above fifteen hundred years, a race rejected of 
God, without government, without laws, without prophets, 
without temple. This argument ye cannot solve; it strikes 
you to the ground like a thunder-clap; ye can show no other 



OF THE JEWS. 351 

reason fcr vour condition than your sins. The two rabbis, 
struck to the heart, silenced, and convinced, forsook their 
errors, became converts, and the day following, in the pre- 
sence of the whole university at Wittenberg, were baptized 
Christians. 

The Jews hope that we shall join them, because we teach 
and learn the Hebrew language, but their hope is futile. 'Tis 
they must accept of our religion, and of the crucified Christ, 
and overcome all their objections, especially that of the altera- 
tion of the Sabbath, which sorely annoys them, but 'twas 
ordered by the apostles, in honour of the Lord's resurrection. 

DCCCLXII. 

There are sorcerers among the Jews, who delight in tor- 
menting Christians, for they hold us as dogs. Duke Albert 
of Saxony well punished one of these wretches. A Jew 
offered to sell him a talisman, covered with strange charac 
ters, which he said effectually protected the wearer against 
any sword or dagger thrust. The duke replied: " I will essay 
thy charm upon thyself, Jew," and putting the talisman round 
the fellow's neck, he drew his sword and passed it through 
his body. " Thou feelest, Jew!" said he, "how 'twould have 
been with me, had I purchased thy talisman?" 

DCCCLXIII. 

The Jews have various stories about a king of Basan, 
whom they call Og; they say he had lifted a great rock to 
throw at his enemies, but God made a hole in the middle, so 
that it slipped down upon the giant's neck, and he could 
never rid himself of it. 'Tis a fable, like the rest of the stories 
about him, but, perhaps, bears a hidden moral, as the fables 
of ^sop do, for the Jews had some very wise men among 
them, 

DCCCLXIV. 

The destruction of Jerusalem was a fearful thing; the fate 
of all other monarchies, of Sodom, of Pharaoh, the captivity 
of Babylon, were as nothing in comparison; for this city had 
been God's habitation, his garden and bed; as the Psalm says: 
" Here will I dwell, for I have chosen her," &c. There was 
the law, the priesthood, the temple; there had flourished David, 
Solomon, Isai^ih, &c.; many prophets weie there interred, so 



3o2 Luther's table-talk, 

that the Jews had just cause to boast of their privileges. 
What are we poor miserable folk — what is Rome, compared 
with Jerusalem? But the Jews are so hardened that they 
listen to nothing; though overcome by testimonies, they yield 
not an inch. 'Tis a pernicious race, oppressing all men by 
their usury and rapine. If they give a prince or a magis- 
trate a thousand florins, they extort twenty thousand from 
the subjects in payment. We must ever keep on our 
guard against them. They think to render homage to God 
by injuring the Christians, and yet we employ their physi- 
cians; 'tis a tempting of God. They have haughty prayers, 
wherein they praise and call upon God, as if they alone were 
his people, cursing and condemning all other nations, re- 
lying on the 23rd Psalm: " The Lord is my shepherd, I 
shall lack nothing." As if that psalm were written exclu- 
sively concerning them. 

DCCCLXV. 

'Tis a vain boasting the Jews make of their privileges, 
after a lapse of above fifteen hundred years. During the 
seventy years, when they were captives at Babylon, they 
were so confused and mingled together, that even then they 
hardly knew out of what tribe each was descended. How 
should it be now, when they have been so long hunted and 
driven about by the Gentiles, whose soldiers spared neither 
their wives nor their daughters, so that now they are, as it 
were, all bastards, none of them knowing out of what tribe 
h^ is. In 1537, when I was at Frankfurt, a great rabbi 
said to me: My father had read very much, and waited for 
the coming of the Messiah, but at last he fainted, and out of 
hope said: As our Messiah has not come in fifteen hundred 
years, most certainly Christ Jesus must be he. 

DCCCLXVI. 

The Jews above all other nations had great privileges; 
they had the chief promises, the highest worship of God, and 
a worship more pleasing to human nature than God's service 
of faith in the New Testament. They agree better with the 
Turks than with the Christians; for both Jews and Turks 
concur in this, that there is but only one God; they cannot 
understand that three persons should be in one divine sub- 



OF THE JEWS. 353 

stance. They are also agreed as to bathings and washinfrs, 
circumcision, and other external worshippings and ceremo- 
nies. 

The Jews had excelling men among them, as Abraham, 
Isaac, Jacob, Moses, David, Daniel, Samuel, Paul, &c. Whp 
can otherwise than grieve that so great and glorious a nation 
should so lamentably be destroyed? The Latin church had 
no excelling men and teachers, but Augustin; and the churches 
of the east none but Athanasius, and he was nothing parti- 
cular; therefore, we are twigs grafted into the right tree. 
The prophets call the Jews, especially those of the line ot 
Abraham, a fair switch, out of which Christ himself came. 

DCCCLXVII. 

In the porch of a church at Cologne there is a statue of a 
dean, who, in the one hand, holds a cat, and in the other a 
mouse. This dean had been a Jew, but was baptized, and 
became a Christian. He ordered this statue to be set up 
after his death, to show, that a Jew and a Christian agree as 
little as a cat and a mouse. And truly, they hate us Chris- 
tians as they do death: it galls them to see us. If I were 
master of the country, I would not allow them to practise 
usury. 

DCCCLXVIII. 

The Jews knew well that Messiah was to come, and that 
they were to hear him, but they would not be persuaded that 
our Jesus was the Messiah. They thought that the Messiah 
would leave all things as he found them; but when they saw 
that Christ took a course contrary to their expectation, they 
crucified him: yet, they boast of themselves as being Gods 
people. 

PCCCLXJ'X. 

A Jew came to me at Wittenberg, and said : He was de- 
sirous to be baptized, and made a Christian, but that he would 
first go to Rome to see the chief head of Christendom. From 
this intention, myself, Philip Melancthon, and other divines, 
laboured to dissuade him, fearing lest, when he witnessed the 
offences and knaveries at Rome, he might be scared from 
Christendom. But the Jew went to Rome, and when he had 
sufiBciently seen the abominations acted there, he returned to 
us again, desiring to be baptized, and said : Now I will vvil* 

AA 



35* Luther's table-talk. 

lingly worship the God of the Christians, for he is a patient 
God. If he can endure such wickedness and villany as is 
done at Rome, he can suffer and endure all the vices and 
kniLveries of the world. 



OF THE TURKS. 

DCCCLXX. 

The Turk is a crafty and subtle enemy, who wars not only 
with great power and boldness, but also with stratagem and 
deceit; he makes his enemies faint and weary, keeping them 
waking with frequent skirmishes, seldom fighting a com- 
plete battle, unless he have tolerable certainty of victory. 
Otherwise, when a battle is offered him, he trots away, de- 
pending upon his stratagems. 

DCCCLXXI. 

The power of the Turk is very great ; he keeps in his pay, 
all the year through, hundreds of thousands of soldiers. He 
must have more than two millions of florins annual revenue. 
We are far less strong in our bodies, and are divided out 
among different masters, all opposed the one to the other, yet 
we might conquer these infidels with only the Lord's prayer, 
if our own people did not spill so much blood in religious 
quarrels, and in persecuting the truths contained in that 
prayer. God will punish us as he punished Sodom and 
Gomorrah, but I would fain 'twere by the hand of some 
pious potentate, and not by that of the accursed Turk. 

DCCCLXXII. 

They say, the famine in the Turkish camp, before Vienna, 
was so great that a loaf of bread fetched its weight in gold, 
whereas Vienna and the archduke's army had all things in 
abundance. This victory is evidently the work of God. The 
Turk had sworn to conquer Germany within the year, and 
had unfurled a consecrated standard, but he was put to the 
rout without accomplishing anything of importance. 



OF THE TURKS. 355 

DCCCLXXIII. 

On the last day of July, 1539, came news that the king of 
Persia had invaded the states of the Turk, and that the latter 
had been obliged to withdraw his forces from Wallachia. Dr 
Luther said: I greatly admire the power of the king of Persia. 
wko can measure his strength with an enemy so formidable 
as the Turk. Truly, these are two mighty empires. Yet 
Germany could well withstand the Turks if she would keep up 
a standing army of fifty thousand foot, and ten thousand horse, 
so that the losses by a defeat might at once be repaired. The 
Romans triumphed over all their enemies, by keeping con- 
stantly on foot forty-two legions of six thousand men each, 
disciplined troops, practised in war. 

DCCCLXXIV. 

News came from Torgau that the Turks had led out into 
the great square at Constantinople twenty-three Christian 
prisoners, w^ho, on their refusing to apostatize, were be- 
headed. Dr. Luther said : Their blood will cry up to 
heaven against the Turks, as that of John Huss did against 
the papists. 'Tis certain, tyranny and persecution will not 
avail to stifle the Word of Jesus Christ. It flourishes and 
grows in blood. Where one Christian is slaughtered, a host 
of others arise. 'Tis not on our walls or our arquebusses I 
rely for resisting the Turk, but upon the Pater Noster. 'Tis 
that will triumph. The Decalogue is not, of itself, sufiicient. 
I said to the engineers at Wittenberg: Why strengthen 
your walls — they are trash ; the walls with which a Christian 
should fortify himself are made, not of stone and mortar, but 
of prayer and faith. 

DCCCLXXV. 

The Turks are the people of the wrath of God. 'Tis hor- 
rible to see their contempt of marriage* 'Twas not so with 
the Romans. 

DCCCLXXVI. 

Let us repent, pray, and await the Lord's will, for human 
defence and help is all too weak. Five years since, the em- 
peror was well able to resist the Turks, when he had levied 
a great army of horse and foot, out of the whole empire, 
Italians and Germans. But then he would not; therefore, 
A a2 



356 LUTHER S TABLE-TALK. 

meantime, many good people were butchered by the Turks. 
Ah, loving God, what is this life, but death I there is nothing 
but death, from the cradle unto old age. I fear all things 
go not right; the tyranny and pride of the Spaniards, doubt- 
less, will give us over to the Turks, and make us subject to 
them. There is great treachery somewhere. I doubt the 
twenty thousand men, and the costly pieces of double cannon 
are wilfully betrayed to the Turk. It is not usual to carry 
such great pieces of ordnance into the field. The emperor 
Maximilian kept them safe at Vienna. It seems to me, as 
though he had said to the Turk: Take these pieces of ord- 
nance as a present; slay and destroy all that cannot escape. 
This expedition has an aspect of treachery; for while our 
men slumber, the Turk constantly watches, attempting all he 
can, both with open power and with secret practices. 

If the Turk were to cause proclamation to be made, that 
every man should be free from taxation and tribute for the 
space of three years, the common people would joyfully yield 
to him. But when he had got them into his claws, he would 
make use of his tyranny, as his custom is, for he takes the 
third son from every man; he is always father of the third 
child. Truly, it is a great tyranny, which chiefly concerns 
the princes of the empire themselves. I ever held the empe- 
ror in suspicion, yet he can deeply dissemble. I have almost 
despaired of him, since he opposed the known truth, which 
he heard at the Diet at Augsburg. The verse in the second 
Psalm holds ever good: " Why do the heathen so furiously 
rage together, and why do the people imagine a vain thing? 
The kings of the earth stand up, and the rulers take counsel 
together, against the Lord, and against his anointed," &c. 
David complained thereof, Christ felt it, the apostles lamented 
it; we feel it too. 'Twas therefore St. Paul said: " Not many 
wise even after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble 
are called," &c. Let us call upon God the Father of our 
Lord Jesus Christ; let us pray, for it is high time. 

DCCCLXXVII. 

The admirable great constancy of John, prince elector of 
Saxony, is worthy of everlasting memory and praise; who 
personally and steadfastly held over the pure doctrine of the 
gospel at the imperial diet at Augsburg, 15'60, And, un- 



OF THE TURKS. '60 , 

happily, Germany is a prey to discord all this time. See how 
furious a hate the papists bear to the partisans of the gospel- 
They have put their faith in the emperor against us, but they 
will come to confusion. A certain count had a great bonfire 
lighted in the night, when he learned the arrival of the em- 
peror in Germany; and a popish priest, near Eisenach, said, 
he would bet all the cows he should have in the year, that 
Martin Luther and his adherents would be hanged before 
Michaelmas. These fellows thought it only needed for the 
emperor to march against the Lutherans, and they cherished 
horrible projects; but they were finely disappointed. 

DCCCLXXVIII. 

The emperor of the Turks maintains great pomp in his 
court. You have to traverse three vestibules before you 
reach the apartment wherein he sits. In the first vestibule are 
twelve chained lions; in the second, an equal number of 
panthers. He has under his rule very rich and populous 
countries; even within the last ten years, the number of his 
subjects has greatly increased. 

The 21st of December, 1536, George, marquis of Branden- 
burg came to Wittenberg, and announced that the Turks had 
obtained a great victory over the Germans, whose fine army 
had been betrayed and massacred; he said that many princes 
and brave captains had perished, and that such Christians as 
remained prisoners, had been treated with extreme cruelty, 
their noses being slit, and themselves used most scornfully. 
Luther said: We, Germans, must consider hereupon that 
God's anger is at our gates, that we should hasten to re- 
pentance while there is yet time; by degrees, he subjugated 
the Saracens, who before were the lords of Syria, Asia, the 
Land of Promise, Assyria, Greece, and a portion of Spain. 
These Solyman utterly overthrew and well nigh annihilated. 'Tis 
thus God plays with kingdoms; as in Isaiah, it is threatened: 
"I the Lord am a strong God over kingdoms; whoso sinneth 
I destroy." The Venetians made no resistance. They are 
effeminate and pretend not to be warriors. 'Tis wonderful 
what progress the Turk has made in the last hundred years, 
yet that is nothing in comparison with the progress the Roman 
empire made in fitty years, though, during twenty-three years 
,of the fifty, it had to maintain a terrible war with Hannibal. 



358 Luther's table-talk. 

Such was its aggrandizement, that Scipio declared it advisable 
that in the public prayers the petition for extended domination 
should be omitted, it being his opinion that now they had 
better see to the taking care of what they had got. Yet God 
overthrt w this mighty empire by the hands of barbarians. 

DCCCLXXIX. 

The elector of Saxony wrote to Dr. Luther that the Turks 
had gained a great victory. Cazianus, Ungnad, Schlick, had 
all been bribed by the enemy, and their names were now pla- 
carded all over Vienna, as condemned traitors. These gene- 
rals led the German army close to the Turkish camp ; a Chris- 
tian, who had made his escape from the infidels, came and 
warned them to be on their guard, but they treated his coun- 
sel with contumely. When the enemy approached, these 
traitors took to flight, with the cavalry, abandoning the infantry 
to slaughter. The Turks next feigned a retreat, whereupon 
the Christian generals ordered the cavalry, eleven hundred 
in number, to return to the charge, but the Turks surround- 
ing them, cut them in pieces also. Cazianus had received 
eighteen thousand ducats from the Turks through a Jew, to 
betray the Christian army, and had promised to deliver the 
king himself into the enemies' hands. Luther, on hearing 
this news, said: Auri sacra fames, quid non mortalia pectora 
co(/is? This traitor must everlastingly burn in hell. I would 
not betray a dog. I much fear it will go ill with Ferdinand, 
who has allowed so great an army to be thrust into the throat 
of the Turk, by the hands of a perjured Mameluke, who here- 
tofore fell from the Turk to the Christians, and now has 
fallen asjain from the Christians to the Turk. 

Our princes and rulers ought to march in person against 
the enemy, and not have him thus encountered; the Turk is 
not to be contemned. Truly, we Germans are jolly fellows; 
we eat, and drink, and game at our ease, wholly heedless of the 
Turk. Germany has been a fine and noble country, but 
'twill be said of her, as of Troy, fuit Ilium. Let us pray 
to God, that, amidst such calamities, he will preserve our 
consciences. I dread lest the money and forces of Germany 
become exhausted, for then, perforce, we must yield to the 
Turk. They reproach me with all this, me, unhappy Martin 
Luther. They reproach me, too, with the revolt of the 



OF THE TURKS. 3o9 

peasants, and with the sacramentarian sects, as though I had 
been their author. Often have I felt disposed to throw the 
keys before God's foot. 

The Turks pretend, despite the Holy Scriptures, that they 
are the chosen people of God, as descendants of Ishmael. They 
say that Ishmael was the true son of the promise, for that 
when Isaac was about to be sacrificed, he fled from his father 
and from the slaughter knife, and, meantime, Ishmael came 
and freely offered himself to be sacrificed, whence he became tne 
child of the promise; as gross a lie as that of the papists con- 
cerning one kind in the sacrament. The Turks make a boast 
of being very religious, and treat all other nations as idolaters. 
They slanderously accuse the Christians of worshipping three 
gods. They swear by one only God, creator of heaven and 
earth, by his angels, by the four evangelists, and by the eighty 
heaven-descended prophets, of whom Mohammed is the great- 
est. They reject all images and pictures, and render homage 
to God alone. They pay the most honourable testimony to 
Jesus Christ, saying that he was a prophet of pre-eminent 
sanctity, born of the Virgin Mary, and an envoy from God, 
but that Mohammed succeeded him, and that while Moham- 
med sits, in heaven, on the right hand of the Father, Jesus 
Christ is seated on his left. The Turks have retained many 
features of the law of Moses, but, inflated with the insolence 
of victory, they have adopted a new worship ; for the glory of 
warlike triumphs is, in the opinion of the world, the greatest 
ofaU. 

Luther complained of the emperor Charles's negligence, who, 
taken up with other wars, suffered the Turk to capture one 
place after another. 'Tis with the Turks as heretofore with 
the Romans, every subject is a soldier, as long as he is able to 
bear arms, so they have always a disciplined army ready for 
the field; whereas we gather together ephemeral bodies of 
vagabonds, untried wretches, upon whom is no dependence. 
My fear is, that the papists will unite with the Turks to exter- 
minate us. Please God, my anticipation come not true, but 
certain it is, that the desperate creatures will do their best to 
deliver us over to the Turks 



360 Luther's table-talk. 

dccclxxx. 

Luther wrote a letter to the emperor's chief general in 
Hungary, admonishing him that he had against him four 
powerful enemies; he had not only to do with flesh and blood, 
but ^vith the devil, with the Turk, with God's wrath, with 
our own sins; therefore he should remember to humble him- 
self and to call upon God for help. 

Luther heard that the emperor Charles had sent into 
Austria eighteen thousand Spaniards against the Turk. 
Whereupon he sighed, and said: 'Tis a sign of the last day 
when those cruel nations, the Spaniards and Turks, are to be 
our masters: I would rather have the Turks for enemies than 
the Spaniards for protectors ; for, barbarous tyrants as they are, 
most of the Spaniards are half Moors, half Jews, fellows who 
believe nothing at all. 

The great hope I have is, that the Turkish empire will be 
brought to an end by intestine dissensions, as it has been 
with all the kingdoms of the world, the Persian, the Chaldean, 
the Alexandrian, the Roman: I hope the four brothers, the 
sons of the great Turk, will dispute the sovereignty among 
themselves. Whoso climbs high, is in danger to fall; the 
best swimmer may be drowned. If it be the will of God, 
though the Turk has climbed high, he may fall to pieces in a 
moment. 

DCCCLXXXI, 

The Turk will go to Rome, as Daniel's prophecy an- 
nounces, and then the last day will not be very distant. 
Germany must be chastised by the Turks. I often reflect 
with sorrow, how utterly Germany neglects all good counsel. 
Victory, however, depends not on ourselves. There is a time 
for conquering the Turks, and a time for being conquered. 
The king of France long exalted himself in his pride, but in 
the end he w^as abused and made captive. The pope long 
despised God and man, but he too is fallen. They say the 
pope lately celebrated the circumcision of four of his sons, 
and invited the great khan, the king of Persia, and the chiefs 
of the Venetians, to the ceremony. He is extremely venerated 
by his subjects. He gives people a passport, called vieh, the 
bearer of which passes safely throughout the Turkish do- 
minions, and is freely lodged wherever he goes. 



OF COUNTRIES AND CITIES. 361 



OF COUNTRIES AND CITIES. 

DCCCLXXXII. 

Our Lord God deals with countries and cities, as I do with 
an old hedge- stake, when it displeases me; I pluck it up and 
burn it, and stick another in its stead. 

DCCCLXXXIIl. 

Tacitus describes Germany very well. He highly extols the 
Germans, by reason of their adherence to promises, especially 
in the state of matrimony, in which particular they excelled 
all other nations. In former times it stood well with Ger- 
many, but now the people are fallen from virtue, and become 
rude, proud, and insolent. 

DCCCLXXXIV. 

The best days were before the deluge, when the people 
lived long, were moderate in eating and drinking, beheld 
God's creatures w^ith diligence, celestial and terrestrial, with- 
out wasting, warring, or debate; then a fresh, cool spring of 
water was more sweet, acceptable, and better reHshed, than 
costly wines. 

DCCCLXXXV. 

Germany is like a brave and gallant horse, highly fed, but 
without a good rider; as the horse runs here and there, 
astray, unless he have a rider to rule him, so Germany is also 
a powerful, rich, and brave country, but needs a good head 
and governor. 

DCCCLXXXVI. 

This constant change in the fashion of dress will produce 
also an alteration of government and manners; we attend too 
much to these things. Emperor Charles frequently says: 
The Germans learn of the Spaniards to steal, and the 
Spaniards learn f)f the Germans to swill. 

DCCCLXXXVII. 

Venice is the richest of cities. She has two kingdoms, 
Cyprus and Candia. Candia once was full of robbers, for 



362 Luther's table-talk. 

six hundred ruined merchants had fled thither. As the island 
is very hilly, they were not able, by force, to get rid of these 
robbers, so the Venetians made proclamation that they ^YOuld 
receive aU the robbers again to favour, upon condition that 
each should bring to them the head of a fellow-robber. By 
which means, one wretch being snapped by another, the 
island was cleared of those vipers. 'Twas a good and wise 
council. Venice respects neither decency nor honour; she 
seeks only her own profit, is always neutral, hanging the 
cloak according to the wind. Now they hold with the Turk, 
ere long they will be for the emperor; what party has victory, 
has them. 

DCCCLXXXVIII. 

Bembo, an exceeding learned man, who had thoroughly in- 
vestigated Rome, said: Rome is a filthy, stinking puddle, full 
of the wickedest wTctches in the world; and he wrote thus: 

" Vivere qui sancte vultis, discedite Eoma ; 
Omnia hie ecce licent, non licet esse probum." 

DCCCLXXXIX. 

In the time of Leo X., there were in an Augustin convent 
at Rome, two monks, who revolted at the horrible wicked- 
ness of the papists, and, in their sermons, found fault with 
the pope. In the night, two assassins were introduced into 
their cells, and next morning they were found dead, their 
tongues cut out, and stuck on their backs. Whoso in Rome 
is heard to speak against the pope, either gets a sound strap- 
pado or has his throat cut; for the pope's name is Noli me 
tangere. 

DCCCXC. 

When I was at Rome, they showed me, for a precious holy 
relic, the halter wherewith Judas hanged himself. Let us 
bear this in mind, and consider in what ignorance our fore- 
fathers were. 



OF VOCATION AND CALLING. 

DCCCXCI. 

Ween they who have the office of teaching, joy not therein, 
that is, have not regard to him that called and sent them; it 



OF VOCATION AND CALLING. 363 

IB, for them, an irksome work. Truly, I would not take the 
wealth of the whole world, now to begin the work against 
the pope, which thus far I have wrought, by reason of the 
exceeding heavy care and anguish wherewith I have been 
burthened. Yet, when I look upon him that called me there- 
unto, I would not for the world's wealth, but that I had 
begun it. 

It is much to be lamented, that no man is content and 
satisfied with that which God gives him in his vocation and 
calling. Other men's conditions please us more than our own; 
as the heathen said: — 

" Fertilior seges est alienis semper in agris, 
Vicinumque pecus grandiiis uber habet." 

And another heathen : — 

" Optat ephippia bos piger, optat arare caballus." 
The more we have the more we want. To serve God is 
for every one to remain in his vocation and calling, be it ever 
so mean and simple. 

DCCCXCII. 

It is said, occasion has a forelock, but is bald behind. Our 
Lord has taught this by the course of nature. A farmer must 
sow his barley and oats about Easter; if he defer it to 
Michaelmas, it were too late. When apples are ripe they 
must be plucked from the tree, or they are spoiled. Pro- 
crastination is as bad as overhastiness. There is my servant 
Wolf: when four or five birds fall upon the bird-net, he will 
not draw it, but says: O, I will stay until more come, 
then they all fly away, and he gets none. Occasion is a great 
matter. Terence says well: I came in time, which is the 
chief thing of all. Julius Caesar understood occasion; Pom- 
pey and Hannibal did not. Boys at school understand it not, 
therefore they must have fathers and masters, with the rod 
to hold them thereto, that they neglect not time, and lose it. 
Many a young fellow has a school stipend for six or seven 
years, during which he ought diligently to study; he has his 
tutors, and other means, but he thinks: O, I have time 
enough yet. But 1 say: No, fellow. What little Jack learns 
not, great John learns not. Occasion salutes thee, and reaches 
out her forelock to thee, saying: " Here I am, take hold of 
me;" thou thinkest she will come again. Then says she: 



.3i54 Luther's table-talk. 

Well, seeing thou wilt not take hold of my top, take hold of 
my tail; and therewith flings away. 

Bona Ventura was but a poor sophist, yet he could say: He 
that neglects occasion is of it neglected, and 'tis a saying with 
us: Take hold of time, while 'tis time, and now, while 'tis now. 
Our emperor Charles understood not occasion, when he took 
the French king prisoner before Pavia, in 1525; nor after- 
wards, when he got into his hands pope Clement, and had 
taken Rome in 1527; nor in 1529, when he almost got hold 
of the great Turk before Vienna. 'Twas monstrous negli- 
gence for a monarch to have in his hands his three great ene- 
mies, and yet let them go. 

DCCCXCIIL 

Germany would be much richer than she is, if such store 
of velvets and silks were not worn, nor so much spice used, 
or so much beer drunk. But young fellows without their 
liquor have no mirth at all; gaming makes not merry, nor 
lasciviousness, so they apply themselves to drinking. At the 
princely jollification lately held at Torgau, each man drank, at 
one draught, a whole bottle of wine; this they called a good 
drink. Tacitus w^rote, that by the ancient Germans it was 
held no shame at all to drink and swill four-and-twenty hours 
together. A gentleman of the court asked: How long ago it 
was since Tacitus wrote this? He was answered, about fifteen 
hundred years. Whereupon the gentleman said : Forasmuch 
as drunkenness has been so ancient a custom, and of such long 
descent, let us not abolish it. 



MISCELLANEOUS. 

DCCCXCIV. 

Anno 1546, a case in law was related to Luther: A miller 
had an ass, which went into a fisherman's boat to drink; the 
boat, not being tied fast, floated away with the ass, so that 
the miller lost his ass, and the fisherman his boat. The 
miller complained that the fisher, neglecting to tie his boat 
fast, had lost him his ass; the fisher complained of the miller 
for not keeping his ass at home, and desired satisfaction for 



MISCELLANEOUS o6o 

his boat. Query: What is the law? Took the ass the boat 
away, or the boat the ass? Luther said: Both were in error; 
the fisherman that he tied not fast his boat; the miller in not 
keeping his ass at home. 

DCCCXCV. 

There was a miser, who, when he sent his man to the 
cellar for wine, made him fill his mouth with water, which 
he was to spit out on his return, to show he had drunk no 
wine. But the servant kept a pitcher of water in the cellar, 
wherewith, after taking his fill of the better drink, he ma- 
naged to deceive his master. 

DCCCXCVI. 

A student of Erfurt, desiring to see Nuremberg, departed 
witli a friend on a journey thither. Before they had walked 
half a mile, he asked his companion whether they should soon 
get to Nuremberg, and was answered: " 'Tis .- carce likely, 
since we have only just left Erfurt." Having repeated the 
question, another half mile further on, and getting the same 
answer, he said: " Let's give up the journey, and go back, 
since the world is so vast!" 

DCCCXCVII. 

Dr. Gomer related that a monk, who had introduced a 
girl into his cell, on quitting her in the morning for matins, 
rubbed his face with holy water. The girl, thinking to fol- 
low his example, daubed her face over with ink, which, in 
the obscurity, she mistook for the water. On his return, the 
monk, seeing her visage all black, thought 'twas the devil he 
had brought there, and, struck with fear, yelled out at the 
top of his voice, and with his cries collected the whole con- 
vent, so that his intrigue was discovered. . 

DCCCXCVIII. 

There are poets who affect to be carried away by their en- 
thusiasm. There was Richius, for example; I remember his 
sitting with his legs out of window, pretending to be in a fit 
of poetic fury against the- devil, whom he was abusing and 
vilifying with long, roundabout phrases. Stiegel, who 
chanced to pass under, for sport suddenly took hold of the 
brawling poet's leg, and frightened him horribly, the poor 
man thinking the devil had come to carry him oflT. 



3f;6 Luther's table-talk. 



PCCCXCIX. 



An iflle priest, instead of reciting his breviary, used to run 
over the alphabet, ^.nd then say: " O, my God, take this 
alphabet, and put it together how you will!" 

DCCCC. 

A certain honest man, at Eisleben, complained to me of 
his great misery; he had bestowed on his children all his 
goods, and now in his old age they forsook and trod him 
under their feet. I said: Ecclesiasticus gives unto parents 
the best counsel, where he says: " Give not all out of thy 
hands while thou livest," &c., for the children keep not pro- 
mises. One father, as the proverb says, can maintain ten 
children, but ten children cannot, or at least will not, main- 
tain one father. There is a story of a certain father that, 
having made his last will, locked it up safe in a chest, and, 
together with a good strong cudgel, laid a note thereby, in 
these words: "The father who gives his goods out of his 
hands to his children, deserves to have his brains beat out 
with cudgels." Here is another story: A certain father, that 
was grown old, had given over all his goods to his children, 
on condition they should maintain him; but the children were 
unthankful, and being weary of him, kept him very hard and 
sparingly, and gave him not sufficient to eat. The father, 
being a wise man, more crafty than his children, locked him- 
self secretly into a chamber, and made a great ringing and 
jingling with gold crowns, which, for that purpose, a rich 
neighbour had lent him, as though he had still much money 
in store. When his children heard this, they gave him ever 
afterwards good entertainment, in hopes he would leave them 
much wealth; but the father secretly restored the crowns 
again to his neighbour, and so rightly deceived his children. 

DCCCCL 

As Luther's wife anointed his feet, by reason of some pain 
he felt, he said to her: Now thou anointest me, but in former 
times the wives were anointed by their husbands; for this 
word in Latin, Uxor, comes from vngendo, anointing; for as 
the heathen saw that many rubs and hindrances were in the 
state of matrimony, therefore, to prevent such misfortunes, 
they used to anoint both the legs of the new married women. 



MISCELLANEOUS. 367 

DCCCCII. 

I have oftentimes noted, when women receive the doctrine 
of the gospel, they are far more fervent in faith, they hold to 
it more stiff and fast, than men do; as we see in the loving 
Magdalen, who was more hearty and bold than Peter, 

DCCCCIII. 

There is no gown or garment that worse becomes a woman 
than when she will be wise. 

DCCCCIV. 

I am a great enemy to flies: Quia sunt imagines diaboli et 
ha-reticorum. When I have a good book, they flock upon it 
and parade up and down upon it, and soil it. 'Tis just the 
same with the devil; when our hearts are purest, he comes 
and soils them. 

DCCCCV. 

The stone of Thrace is found on the borders of the 
Euxine, and on a river in Scythia; it burns in the water, 
but is extinguished if oil be thrown on it. This property 
has not been given to it without reason; 'tis an image of 
the hypocrites, who burn with the ardour of an accumulation 
of good works, and flame all the more, the more they are 
sprinkled with the water of human traditions and ceremonial 
practices; but, on the contrary, when oil is poured over 
them, that is, the Word of God, lose their disorderly fury. 
Dioscorides and Nicander mention this stone. 

DCCCCVI. 

The word amianthus comes from the Greek a and mitho, 
meaning, together, cleansing. 'Tis mentioned by Dioscorides, 
book v., cap. xciii. The amianthus (asbestos) is found in 
Cyprus, and is so soft that it can be woven into a tissue, 
which suffers no injury when thrown into the fire, but, on 
the contrary, derives additional beauty from the process. 
This stone is the image of the church, whereupon calamities 
and persecutions inflict no injury, but rather render her 
more brilliant and agreeable in God's eyes. The JEi\i2i is a 
stone, found in eagles' nests, which has the property of aiding 
women in their labour, when tied to the left arm. Thia 
Btone, further, has the property of detecting thieves. 



368 Luther's table-talk. 

dccccvii. 
The sparrow is a most voracious animal, and does great 
harm to the crops. The Hebrews call it tschirp. It should 
be destroyed wherever found. 

DCCCCVIII. 

Dr. Luther heard, one day, a nightingale singing very 
sweetly near a pond full of frogs, who, by their croaking, 
seemed as though they wanted to silence the melodious bird. 
The doctor said: Thus 'tis in the world; Jesus Christ is the 
nightingale, making the gospel to be heard; the heretics and 
false prophets, the frogs, trying to prevent his being heard. 

DCCCCIX. 

Question was made why, in the Psalms and other portions 
of the Bible, there is repeated mention of ravens and 
sparrows, of all birds the least agreeable to the sight, and, in 
other respects, odious? Dr. Luther said: If the Holy Ghost 
could have named birds more objectionable than these, he 
would have done so, in order to show us that, as in their 
case, what we receive is not given to our merits. 

DCCCCX. 

Aristotle reckons swans among the birds which have strong 
web-feet, so as they may dwell about lakes and marshes. 
They are creatures that bring up a large family; they live to 
a great age, and their habits are worthy of close observation. 
They do not attack the eagle, but they successfully defend 
themselves against his aggressions. It is certain they sing 
very melodiously at the moment of their death, and some 
authors relate that they feed upon betony, in order to check 
the ardour of amorous passion, and to add strength to their 
wings. I don't know a more exact image of the church. 
The church rests upon strong feet, so that the power of hell 
may not overthrow her. She is surrounded by lakes and 
marshes, that is, she aspires not to earthly dominion. She 
checks impure tendencies, and prescribes chastity of life. 
She tenderly rears numerous children, who are the consolation 
of her old age. She attacks not tyrants, but she repels their 
assaults by means of her two powerful wings, the ministry 
of the Word and fervent prayer; 'twas with these weapons 



MISCELLANEOUS. 369 

slie overthrew Sennacherib, Julian, and other tyrants. Finally, 
tlie swan sings at the approach of death; so the church, when 
one of her members comes to his last moment, sings to him 
the glad notes of the Son of God. 

DCCCCXI. 

The multitude of books is a great evil. There is no mea- 
sure or limit to this fever for writing; every one must be an 
author; some out of vanity, to acquire celebrity and raise 
up a name; others for the sake of lucre and gain. The Bible 
is now buried under so many commentaries, that the text is 
nothing regarded. I could wish all my books were buried 
nine ells deep in the ground, by reason of the ill example 
they will give, every one seeking to imitate me in writing 
many books, with the hope of procuring fame. But Christ died 
not to flivour our ambition and vain-glory, but that his name 
might be glorified. 

The aggregation of large libraries tends to divert men's 
thoughts from the one great book, the Bible, which ought, 
day and night, to be in every one's hand. My object, my 
hope, in translating the Scriptures, was to check the so pre- 
valent production of new works, and so to direct men's study 
and thoughts more closely to the divine Word. Never will 
the writings of mortal man in any respect equal the sen- 
tences inspired by God. We must yield the place of honour 
to the prophets and the apostles, keeping ourselves prostrate 
at their feet as we listen to their teaching. I would not have 
those who read my books, in these stormy times, devote one 
moment to them which they would otherwise have conse- 
crated to the Bible. 

DCCCCXII. 

I wrote this epitaph for my poor daughter Magdalen, who 
died when she was fourteen years old: 

" Dormio cum Sanctis hie Magdalena Lutberi. 
Filia et hoc strato tecta qniesco meo. 
Filia mortis eram peccati semine nata, 
Sanguine sed Christe redempta tuo." 

DCCCCXIII. 

The voice of a faithful soul to Christ. — " Ego sum tuu?Ti 
peccatum, tu mea justitia; triumpho igitur securus, quia nee 

B B 



370 

meiim peccatum obruet tuam justitiam, nee tua justitia sinet 
me esse aut manere peccatorem. Benedicte Dominas Deus 
miserator meus et Redemtor in te solum confido." 

DCCCCXIV. 

Luther's Prayer. 

Sum tuus in vita, tua sunt mea funera Christe, 
Da precor imperii sceptra tenere tui. 

Cur etenim moriens tot vulnera sseva tulisti'' 
Si non sum regni portio parva tui. 

Cur rigido latuit tua vita inclusa s^pulcro, 
Si non est mea mors, morte fugata tua? 

Ergo mihi certam praestes O Christe salutem. 

DCCCCXV, 

A certain English very learned gentleman, at Witten- 
berg, was much conversant with Luther at his table; but the 
gentleman had not the German tongue very familiarly, so 
Luther said to him: I will give you my wife for a school- 
mistress; she shall teach you German readily, for she therein 
far surpasses me. Yet, when women are ready in speaking, 
it is not to be commended; it becomes them much better 
when they keep silence and speak little. 

DCCCCXVI. 

On the 18th November, 1538, mention was made of the 
inundation of rivers arising from earthquakes. Dr. Luther 
observed: The Nile overflows its banks every year, but it 
deposits over the land of Egypt a fertilising slime. The 
Elbe overflows, also, but it only deposits sand, and carries 
away trees and houses. The name Elbe comes from Elffe, 
(eleven), because it is formed of the combined xvaters of 
eleven different streams. The dangers arising from water 
are manifold. We see strong men drowned in places where 
the depth of water is a mere nothing. 'Tis the work of the 
devil. The ships they build in some of the ports of the 
North Sea are of vast dimensions; one single vessel will cost 
36,000 ducats. Noah's ark was a colossal structure; it was 
300 cubits long, 50 wide, and 30 high; proportions quite in- 
credible, if we were not assured of them in the Scripture. 



RELATIVE DUTIES. 371 

DCCCCXVII. 

A traveller who had fallen into the hands of some robbers, 
was murdered by them. In his last moments, seeing some 
ravens flying over his head, he exclaimed to them: I call 
upon you to avenge my death. Three days after, the rob- 
bers, going into the neighbouring town, saw some ravens on 
the roof of the inn where they were carousing. One of 
them said, sneeringly: I suppose those are the ravens come 
to avenge the death of the traveller we despatched the other 
day. The servant of the inn, overhearing these words, ran 
and repeated them to the magistrate, who had the robbers 
taken up, and, on inquiry being made, they were convicted 
of the murder and hanged. 

DCCCCXVIII. 

Robbers are accursed of God; the blessing of the Lord is 
withdrawn from them, even in temporal matters, and when 
they think themselves at the summit of prosperity, they fall. 



RELATIVE DUTIES 

EXPEESSED IN SCEIPTURE WOEDS BY LUTHER. 

I.— Clergy. 

A BISHOP must be blameless, the husband of one wife, 
vigilant, sober, of good behaviour, given to hospitality, apt to 
teach, not given to wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre, 
but patient, not a brawler, not covetous, one that rules well 
his own house, having his children in subjection with all 
gravity; not a novice; holding fast the faithful word, as he has 
been taught, that he may be able by sound doctrine both to 
exhort and convince the gainsayers. 1 Tim. iii. 2. 6. Tit. i. 9. 

II. — People. 

The Lord has ordained, that they which preach the gospel 
should live of the gospel. 1 Corinth, ix. 14. comp. Luke x. 7. 

Let him that is taught in the word, communicate unto him 
that teaches, in all good things. Be not deceived, God is not 
mocked. Gal. vi. 6. 7. 

B B 2 



372 Luther's table-talk. 

We beseech you, bretliren, to know them which labour 
among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you; 
and to esteem them very highly in love, for their works sake; 
and be at peace among yourselves. 1 Thess. v. 13. comp. 
1 Tim. V. 17. 

Obey them that have tLe rule over you, and submit your- 
selves, for they watch for your souls, as they that must give 
account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief, for 
that is unprofitable for you. Heb. xiii. 17. 

III. — Magistrates. 

Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers; for there 
is no power but of God; the powers that be, are ordained of 
God. Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the 
ordinance of God; and they that resist, shall receive to them- 
selves damnation. For he bears not the sword in vain, for 
he is the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon 
him that does evil. Rom. xiii. 1, 2, 4. comp. Psalm Ixxxii. 
3, 4. Psalm ci. 6, 8. 

IV. — Subjects, 

Pender unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto 
God the things that are God's. Matt. xxii. 21. 

Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, 
but also for conscience sake. For, for this cause pay you 
tribute also: for they are God's ministers, attending continually 
upon this very thing. Render to all their dues; tribute to 
whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom 
fear, honour to whom honour. Rom. xiii. 5, 6, 7. 

I exhort therefore, that, first of all, supplications, prayers, 
intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men; for 
kings, and for all that are in authority; that we may lead a 
quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, for this 
is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour. 
1 Tim. ii. 1, 2, 3. 

Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man for the Lord's 
sake, whether it be to the king as supreme, or unto governors, 
as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evil 
doers, and for the praise of them that do well. 1 Peter, ii. 13, 
14. comp. Tit. iii. 1. 



RELATIVE DUTIES. 373 

1 

V. — Husbands, 

Husbands, dwell with your wives according to knowledge, 
giving honour unto the wife as unto the weaker vessel, and 
as being heirs together of the grace of life, that your prayers 
be not hindered, 1 Peter, iii. 7. 

Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the 
church. Eph. v. 25. And be not bitter against them. Col. 
iii. 19. 

VI. — Wives. 

TVives, submit yourselves unto your own husbands, as unto 
the Lord, Eph. v. 22, even as Sarah obeyed Abraham, 
calling him Lord; whose daughters ye are as long as ye do 
well, and are not afraid with any amazement. I Peter, iii. 6. 

VII. — Parents. 

Fathers, provoke not your children to anger, lest they be 
discouraged. Col. iii. 21. But bring them up in the nurture 
and admonition of the Lord. Eph. vi. 4. 

VIII. — Children. 
Children, obey your parents in the Lord; for this is right. 
Honour thy father and mother, which is the first command- 
ment with promise; that it may be well with thee, and that 
thou mayest live long on the earth. Eph. vi. 1, 3. 

IX. — Householders. 

Masters, forbear threatening, knowing that your Master 
also is in heaven; neither is there respect of persons with 
him. Eph. vi. 9. comp. Col. iv. L Deuter. xxiv. 14. 

X. — Man-servants, 3Iaid -servants, and Work-folks. 
Servants, be obedient to them that are your masters, accord- 
ing to the flesh, Tsdthfear and trembling, in singleness of your 
heart as unto Christ. Not with eye-service, as men-pleasers, 
but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the 
heart; with good-will doing service as to the Lord, and not to 
men; knowing that whatsoever good thing any man doeth, the 
same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free. 
Eph. vi. 5, 8. comp. Titus, ii. 9, 10. 1 Tim. vi. 2. 



374 LUTHER S TABLE-TALK, 

XI. — Youth of both Sexes, 
Younger, submit yourselves unto the elder; for God re- 
sisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble. 1 Peter, v. o. 
comp. Prov. xii. 1. Eccl. ix. 1. Prov. xxiv. 14. Luke ii. 52. 

XII. — Old Men. 
Bid the aged men to be sober, grave, temperate, sound in 
faith, in charity, in patience. Titus, ii. 2. 

XIII. — Old Women, 
Bid the aged women that they be in behaviour as becometh 
holiness; not false accusers, not given to much wine; teachers 
of good things, that they may teach the young women to be 
sober, to love their husbands, to love their children, to be 
discreet, chaste, keepers at home, good, obedient to their own 
husbands, that the word of God be not blasphemed. Titus, 
ii. 3. 5. 

XIV. — Widows. 
She that is a widow indeed, and desolate, trusteth in God, 
and continueth in supplications and prayers night and day. 
But she that liveth in pleasure is dead while she liveth. 1 Tim. 
V. 5. 

XV. — General Duties. 

Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. All the other 
commandments are briefly comprehended in this. Rom 13, 9. 
And continue instant in prayers for all men. 1 Tim. ii. 1. 
comp. Philip, iv. 8, 9. 

Let eac-h with diligence his duty know, 
And in that dwelling happiness shall tio>?. 



INDEX. 



Abductiox of a girl, even by lier 
own consent, condemned, 304. 

Abraham, his strong faith, 64, 147, 
241. 

Absolution, conditional, mischief of, 
IGl. 

Adam, how it would have been with 
him had he not transgressed, yet 
had had children, 48 ; his tem- 
perance, 56 ; his miserable con- 
dition, ib. ; decay of his bodily 
strength after the fall, 57 ; his tri- 
bulations, 1 14 ; his childi-en, nuin 
ber of, 241. 

Adultery, a question respecting, '2fl9; 
two sorts of, described, 303. 

Agar, why it was she received so 
little from Abraham, 243. 

Ahab, king, Luther's opinion that he 
was saved through faith, 237. 

Albert of Mayence, punishment of a 
blaspheming physician of his, 200. 

Albert of Saxony, how he punished 
a Jew sorcerer, 351. 

Alchymy commended, 326 ; it affords 
an emblem of the resurrection, 
325. 

Allegories, when laudable, 326 ; de- 
fined, ib. ; how they are to be un- 
derstood, 327 ; must not be lightly 
used in Christian doctrine, ib. ; 
of sophists denounced, 328 ; pre- 
valence of, in popery, ib. 

Adversaries and heretics, gi-eat be- 
nefit of, 289. 

Amaranth, the likeness between it 
and the* true church, 172. 

Ambition the rankest poison to the 
church, 187. 



Amianthus(Asbestcs) described, 367 
it is an emblem of the church, ib. 

Ammerbach, a proposition of his de 
nounced, 198. 

Anabaptists, their cavilling answer- 
ed, 163. 

Ancients, great deeds of the, lost to 
us for want of historians, 332. 

Anger proper against God's ene- 
mies, 153. 

Anecdotes : of a German toper, 364; 
of a miser and his man, 365 ; of 
a student of Erfurt, ib. : of a monk 
and his mistress, ib. ; of Kichius 
the poet, 366 ; of an idle priest, 
ib. ; of a father and his cliildren, 
ib. ; another, ib. 

Angels defined, 245 ; the acknowledg- 
ment of them needful in the 
church, ib. ; the logical manner 
of this acknowledgment, ib. ; their 
unceasing defence of mankind 
against the devil, 246 ; they are 
getting their arms ready for the 
last day, 247. 

Animals useful to man, more abound 
thau noxious creatures, 46. 

, wild, beasts of the law ; 



tame, beasts of grace, 57. 

Antichrist shown to be the pope, 
193; the papists' idle dream con- 
cerning him, 206 ; genealogy of, 
219. 

Apostles, the, their notion about 
Christ's kingdom, 91 ; their fami- 
liar intercourse with the Saviour, 
ib. ; their powerful "preaching 
after they had received the Hoh 
Ghost, 93 ; how they speak of 



376 



INDEX. 



Christ. 94 ; their hard encounter 
with the world, 95 ; their courage 
after the Ascension, 100, 107, 
108 ; their sins, 113 ; why it was 
they were afraid when the arisen 
Christ came to them, 244. 

Aquinas, Thomas, censured, 212. 

Aristotle, his authority among the 
papi&ts, 26 ; denounced, 346. 

Arius, duration of his heresy, 199, 
286 ; his heresy described, 285. 

Astrology denounced, 342, 343. 

Astronomy commented on, 341. 

Augustin, St., his similitude touch- 
ing the law, 141 ; his conversion, 
158 ; misled on the subject of 
celibacy, 216; criticised, 232, 
233 ; a saying of his about chil- 
dren, 298. 

Bagxios denounced, 302. 

Bakers, their roguery, 61. 

Baptism, three sorts of, 160 ; a sure 
covenant with faithful Christians, 
ib. ; a question as to tlie baptism 
of a person in a doubtful case, ib. 

Baptism of infants not yet born, 164. 

Behemoth referred to, 267. 

Bembo, his character of Rome, 362. 

Bernard, St., characterized, 215; 
his happy death, 321. 

Bible, the, proved to be God's 
Word, 1 ; is full of faith, hope, 
and charity, 2 ; its contents not 
to be canvassed by our mere 
reason, 3 ; must, before all things, 
be preserved, ib. ; its texts of 
infinite comfort under tribulation, 
ib. ; a full knowledge of them ren- 
ders a man a perfect theologian, 
ib. ; profundity of its wisdom, 4 ; 
its efficaciousness, ib. ; how it 
should be regarded, ib. ; difficulty 
of comprehending its contents, 6 ; 
simplicity of its language not to 
be contemned, 26. 

Biel, Gabriel, his book on the 
Mass, 236. 

Books, the, multiplication of de- 
nounced, 369. 

Brentius commended, 345. 



Bullinger, Luther's conversion of 
him, 15. 

Bullum versus Boatxtm, case of, 365. 

Buonaventura criticised, 4. 

Burial of the dead, a ceremony ob- 
served in, 154. 

Cain and Abel, their relative posi- 
tion, 5. 

Cain, period of his birth, 241. 

Calixtis, his denial of any divine 
power in the pope,' 210. 

Comparisons condemned, 283. 

Candia, how it was cleared of rob- 
bers, 362. 

Canonists and other heretics are 
chimaeras, 17. 

Capuchins, the, denounced, 213 , 
anecdote of their grasping cupidity, 
214. 

Cardinals and popish bishops cha- 
racterized, 196. 

Cardinals, characterized, 219 ; how 
they inundate all countries, ib. ; 
illustrative anecdote of their ig- 
norance, 304. 

Carlstad, his doctrine against the use 
of physic^ 257 ; condemned, 283. 

Catechism, vitality of the, 124 ; com- 
mented on, 125. 

Caterpillars likened to the devil, 
252. 

Catherine, St., legend of, a mere 
fable, 329. 

Cazianus, the German general, trear 
cherv of, 358. 

Celibacy denounced, 215, 300; of 
spiritual persons, when it began, 
307. 

Cellarius, Martin, condemned, 282. 

Cerberus described, 266. 

Ceremonies and ordinances, on, 
151, 154; defined, 221; they are 
unimportant, 222. 

Cerinthus, the good resulting from 
his heresy, 289. 

Charity enforced, 68 ; general ab- 
sence of, 152. 

Charles V., his occupati<in of spiri- 
tual livings, 66 ; his conduct at 
the diet of Augsburg, 232 ; his 



INDEX. 



377 



conduct in reference to the Turks 
denouuced, -Boo, 3o6. 

Children, of all God's creatures, best 
illustration of his power and wis- 
dom, 55 ; their lot in the world 
assigned them ere they couie 
into it, ib. ; nearer to God thau 
grown-up persons are, 58 ; resem- 
blance between theip and their 
parents, 59 ; ordered by Christ to 
be baptized, 10:3 ; consolation on 
the death of, 277 ; their crying a 
good thing, 315. 

Chiromancy rejected, 341. 

Christ Jesus — his words, power of, 
25; full faith in his Godhead, 
enforced, 76 ; the comfort Lu- 
ther derived from his promises, 
77, 80 ; is coequal with the 
Father, 78 ; gives peace and sal- 
vation, not as an agent, but as 
himself a Creator, ib.; the mystery 
of his humanity incomprehensible, 
79 ; his visits to Jerusalem, ob- 
sei'vation upon with reference to 
the papists, ib. ; object of his being 
born into the world, ib. ; the sub- 
ject of his human birih not to be 
searched into, 79 ; speculations 
respecting his behaviour as a sup- 
posed human child, 80 ; his humi- 
lity of demeanour, ib. and 81 ; 
argument for not veiling his 
lowly condition when on earth, 
81 ; he is our High Priest, con- 
secrated by God the Father, and 
our constant Mediator in heaven, 
82, though he suffers his preachers 
to be ill used on earth, 83 ; he is 
our bridegroom, ib. ; inequality 
of the exchange made between 
Mm and the world, 84 ; his blood 
our sole salvation, ib. ; vaiious 
heresies against him, 85 ; the 
pope's enmity to him, ib. ; his 
resurrection, 86 ; his fearful suf- 
ferings on earth, ib. ; his beau- 
tiful converse with his disciples at 
the La-st Supper, 87 ; his peculiar 
attiibute, 88 ; his sweating of 
Tolood, ib.; faith in him essential 



to salvation, ib. ; the prophecies 
respecting him in the Old Testa- 
ment, ib. ; blasphemies of the 
sophists respecting him, 89 ; his 
riding into Jerusalem commented 
upon, ib. ; sufl'ers more from the 
papists than he did from the Jews, 
90; speculations respecting his 
second coming, ib. ; object of Ids 
descent into hell, ib. ; the tumults 
arising out of his vindication, 
wholesome, 91 ; his familiar in- 
tercourse with his disciples, ib. ; 
the sole aim of all Luther's cogi- 
tations, 92 ; what is his proper 
office ? ib. ; how wonderfully he 
governs his kingdom, ib. ; to 
whom it is he comes, ib. ; his 
gracious kindness to man, ib.; his 
gentle manner of preaching, ib. ; 
how he was maintained, ib. ; ob- 
scurity of the prophecies respect- 
ing his humanity, 94 ; how he 
resists the devil, ib. ; his preser- 
vation of his sheep, 95 ; his pro- 
hibition of violent means, ib.; his 
kingdom distinguished from that of 
the pope and that of the Turk, 96 ; 
how the world rejects him as aphy- 
sician, ib. ; only desires that we 
speak of him, 97 ; his washing of 
the disciples' feet, 98 ; his spiritual 
cleansing of us, ib. ; his miracles, 
99 ; his crucifixion commented on, 
99; his ascension commented on, 
100 ; compass of his voice, 101 ; his 
gentleness and gracious goodness 
to us, 102; he need not be seen 
of us corporally, 103, 104; dirine 
power of his mere name, ib. ; an 
overmatch for the pope, ib.; an 
illusive vision of him that appear- 
ed to Luther, ib.; extent of his 
mission, 105; how the history of 
him is to be considered, 106 ; de- 
lay in his preaching, ib. ; his dis- 
crimination of sins, 112 ; his death, 
what it has done for us, 140; faith 
in him all powerful, 143 ; merits 
tenfold our worldly sacrifices for 
his sake, 149 ; belief in him indis- 



378 



INDEX. 



pensable, ib.; likened to tlie lemon- 
tree, 173; directions of, as to ex- 
communication, 176; his homely 
style, 188 ; his words should not be 
modified according to human ima- 
ginings, 234; his temptation on 
the Mount, •257; his humble de- 
meanour, 258; his tribulations, 
273 ; he is our best mediator with 
God, 274; his sweating of blood, 
280; his kingdom unpalatable to 
the world, 295 ; his history a conso- 
lation under all tribulations, 320 ; 
by what authority he drove the 
buyers and sellers out of the 
Temple, 349; why the Jews hated 
him, 353 ; 

Christians must undergo suffering, 
51 ; gospel, like Christ, contemned 
by the world, 97 ; good, their hu- 
mility, 145 ; must be well ground- 
ed in Scripture, 149 ; their duties 
as such in reference to tyrannical 
governors, 159 ; they should pray 
unceasingly, ib. ; evil, defined, 
217 ; the state of, likened to a 
goose, 289 ; the armour of a, de- 
scribed, 290 ; sin in them is more 
offensive than in the heathen, 292; 
the mere name more glorious, 
than the name holy, 294; life, 
what it is, 295 ; where and when 
they may curse, 315. 

Christopher, St., legend of, 329. 

Chronicles, the book of, condemned, 
12. 

Chrysostom, St. criticized, 232. 

Church, the early, how divided, 226 

Church, the true, what it is, 169 ; 
God himself must defend it, ib. ; 
its apparently mean form, ib., and 
170 ; test of it, 170 ; it cannot 
subsist without bloodshed, ib. ; 
its very name made an ai-gument 
against it, 171; how it is en- 
closed in and protected by the 
Word, ib. ; likened to the ama- 
ranth, 172; and to the olive tree, 
173; fallacies of the papists re- 
specting, confuted, 174 ; what it 
has to contend with, 272 ; poverty 



of the, 330 ; the, likened to as- 
bestos, 368 ; and to swans, ib. ; 
the pope's, three-fold distinction 
of it, 188. 

CliTirches, two sorts of, ] 74. 

Cicero, his style of oratory, 184; 
commended, 346. 

Clement VII., his suspicious fears, 
201. 

Comets, likeness between them and 
heretics, 56. 

Comfort, human and divine, discri- 
minated, 51. 

Commandments, the Ten, comment- 
ed on, 126, 127, 128; observa- 
tions upon, 295. 

Communion, the, not to be adminis- 
tered to young children, 162 ; can 
it be admiuistered by one who is 
himself a heretic, 163 ; or by the 
father of a family to his house- 
hold, ib. ; honour to be shown it. 
169 ; the papists, in reality, have 
it not, ib. 

Concord in doctrine, how great a 
blessing, 183. 

Concord, observations upon, 314; 
illustration of, in a proceeding of 
goats, ib. 

Confession, auricular, a horrible 
oppression, 140 ; wearisomeness 
of, in popedom, 161; why it was 
instituted, 162 ; its secrets not to 
be revealed, ib 

Conformities, the book of, denounced, 
210. 

Conjugal union is odious in the 
devil's eyes,who accordingly causes 
it to be of rare occurrence, 301. 

Constantine, the emperor, by whom 
was he baptized ? 164 ; his conces- 
sions to the pope a mere fable, 203. 

Constituted authority, question of 
resistance to, considered, 333 — 
337. 

Converts, who are the most accept- 
able, 282. 

Corfentius murdered by the papists, 
197. 

Corn, quantity of, in the world, 42. 
1 Councils, only four of them worthy 



INDEX. 



!79 



of praise, 227 ; they are in gene- 
ral mere futilities, ib. ; a popish, 
rejected by Luther, 228 ; how 
they ought to be conducted, 229 ; 
what they should be, ib. 

Counsel, deceitful, how evil a thing, 
61. 

Creed, the, lauded, 124, 126. 

Cuckoo, the, a likeness of the pope, 
199, 200. 

Daniel, the prophet, characterized, 
1 1 ; his prophecy of antichrist ap- 
plied to the pope, 193, et seq. 

David, his psalms criticized, 13 ; his 
tribulations, 21, 238, 241, 272; 
his fearful fall, 230 ; why he was 
permitted by God to fall into sin, 
31 ; could not himself build the 
temple, because he had shed 
blood, 237 ; excellence of his 
wives, ib. ; did well to marry 
Bathsheba, 241 ; his great elo- 
quence, 242 ; why he was per- 
mitted to fall, ib. ; his full faith, 
243 ; his treatment of Shimei 
vindicated, 243 ; his tribulation 
respecting Absalom, 324. 

Dead wife, story of one, 253. 

Death, infinity of its shapes, 57 ; 
whence so finely discoursed of by 
the ancients, 00 ; how fearfully 
regarded by the moderns, 61 ; we 
should be always ready to meet it, 
65 ; for the sake of Christ a pre- 
cious end, 318 ; the fear of, is death 
itself, ib. ; views of the ancients 
respecting, 319; is in every limb 
we have, 320 ; swallowed up in 
victory, 321 ; triumphant when 
Adam died, but vanquished when 
Christ died, 322. 

Decretals, the, contain not one word 
of Scripture or the Catechism, 
208 ; the monstrosity of, 210 ; 
denounced, 211, 212. 

Demons, how they are to be ex- 
pelled, 267. 

Desert, a work nowhere to be found, 
152. 

Devil, the, Ms deceitful dealing 



with man, 37; more pleasing to 
the world than God. 41 ; how 
utterly God shows bis scorn of 
hira, in enabling man to over- 
come him, 48 ; what his amuse- 
ment is, 51 ; how he is af- 
fiighted at the bare mention ot 
Christ's name, 81, 87; his claim 
to be prince and god of the 
world, 83 ; his undying hostility 
to Christ, ib. ; his enmity to man- 
kind likened to the attack of a 
wolf on a sheepfold, 87 ; how 
he assaults the Christian world, 
94 ; his fierce hatred to Christ 
103 ; he is beaten, not by the 
law, but by the Gospel, 138 ; 
to be handed over to him is our 
greatest punishment, 247 ; his 
true picture, ib. ; is the author of 
all worldly maladies and calamities, 
250; how he deludes us with 
false hopes of gain in the mines, 
as well as above ground, ib. ; an 
illustration of his subtle malice, 
252 ; how he seduces us to sin, 
253 ; whom they are he hates, 
254 ; can only be resisted by the 
firm in faith, ib. ; his hatred to 
mankind, ib. ; why he is our 
enemy, 255 ; he knows the 
thoughts of the ungodly, for 'tis 
he suggests them : not of the 
godly, 256 ; his infinite power to 
harm, ib. ; the titles given him 
in the Scriptures, ib. ; he is the 
author of all worldly maladies, 
ib ; various ways in which he 
plagues people, 257 ; his tempta 
tion of Christ, ib. ; how we must 
resist him, 258 ; how he is to be 
driven out, 259 ; his encourage- 
ment of the ambitious, ib. ; his 
assaults profitable to us, 262 ; his 
assumption of the form of Christ 
for the purpose of deceiving men, 
ib. ; his two occupations, 263 ; 
his power checked by God, ib. ; 
his power most seen in the fall of 
God's saints, 265 ; how he af- 
frights us, by aggravating our 



380 



INDEX^ 



sins, ib. ; likened to a fowler, 264 ; 
he dwells in man's hard heart, ib. ; 
his two shapes or forms, ib. ; he 
is vexed with our psalms, but de- 
lighted with our passions, 265 ; 
as a prince of the world we must 
pay him corporal toll, ib.; his 
mode of treating people contrasted 
with Christ's, 266 ; how craftily he 
misleads men, bodily and spiritu- 
ally, 260 ; his delight in doing 
mischief, and, more especially, i 
in assaulting the godly, 261 ; is | 
a proud spirit, and cannot endure 
contumely, 262 ; two ways of his i 
possessing men, 267 ; how he is | 
to be repelled, 268, 269 ; plagues 
us in the weakest place, 274 ; 
must be strenuously contended 
with, 278 ; will get little by kill- 
ing the godly, 320. 

" Devil take me," divine punishment 
for the use of this phrase, 254. 

Dialectica and Rhetorica charac- 
terised, 3;39. 

Diet of Augsburg, its beneficial effect 
upon protestantism, 230. 

Dionysius, his Mystical Divinity 
criticised, 4. 

Discontent, general prevalence of, 
273. 

Discord among Christians, preval- 
ence of, 103; deprecated, 218. 

Divinity, practical, what it is, 4 ; an 
art of difficult acquisition, though 
the world deem otherwise, 5 ; is 
not, as the frivolous imagine, to 
be learned off-hand, 27 ; consists 
of use and practice, 179. 

Divorce, two causes of, 806. 

Dog, anecdote of one at Lintz. 66. 

" Drink ye all of it,' observation on 
these words, 169. 

Drunkenness does but aggravate the 
offence of sin, 293. 

Duties, relative, expressed by Luther 
in Scripture words, 371. 

Eagle, secret allegory contained in 
one of its habits, 327. 



Earth, wonderful fertilization of, by 

God, 59. 
Eberhard of Wirtemberg, the pre- 
cious treasure he possessed in 

loving subjects, 311. 
Ecclesiasticus, the book of, criticised, 

11. 
Ecclesiastical finery of the papists, 

origin and occasion of, 224. 
Edessa, effect of the prayer of a 

bishop of, 48. 
Elector of Saxony, his courageous 

protection of the protestants at 

the Diet of Augsburg, 230. 
Elijah, his history an awful one, 239. 
Elisha and Elijah, their conduct 

vindicated, 243. 
Epicureans, modern, their contempt 

for God's Word, 8. 
Epiphanius' History of the Church, 

233. 
Erasmus condemned, 283 — 6. 
Esdras, the book of, criticised, 11. 
Esther, the book of, condemned, ib. 
Eve, the most miserable of women, 

242. 
Evil, how it comes from good, 46. 
Excommunication, a necessaiy 

power in the church, 175, 178 ; 

manner of, 176 ; how it might be 

obviated, ib. ; occasion of its 

decay, 177 ; abuse of, by the pope, 

ib. ; hidden or invisible, described, 

178. 
Executioners, their office vindicated, 

308. 
External things of God and of man 

discriminated, 22. 

Faith, observ-ations on, 26, 29, 51, 
62. 98 ; how difficult a thing it is to 
be impressed with it, 145 ; charac- 
terised, 146 ; necessity of, 147 ; 
consequences of, 151 ; and hope 
distinguished, 145 ; enforced, 275. 

False brethren denounced, 287-8 ; 
Clmstians, likened to clouds with- 
out rain, 290 ; saints, likened to 
scorpions, 290. 

Farmers, denunciation of covetous, 
66. 



INDEX. 



381 



Fashion of dress, constant changes 

in, deprecated, 362. 
Fasting of the papists ridiculed, 

212 ; denounced, 222 ; when it is 

good, 22."3. 
Fathers, the, their power over their 

chihh-en, 58 ; resemblance be- j 

tween them and their children, 09; 

their exposition of God's word 

likened to straining milk through 

a coal sack, 228; books of the, 

their darkness as to faith, 232 ; 

they ai*e to be read cautiously, 

233. 
Fire-arms denounced, 331. 
Firstborn, unworthy, rejected of 

God, 47. 
Flies, Luther's antipathy to, 367. 
Force, not to be resorted to by 

Christian teachers, 95. 
Francis, St., blasphemously made by 

the papists of equal eflficacy witli 

Christ, 211 ; characterized, 213. 
Franciscans, the, vast numbers of, 

213. 
Fratres ignoranlicB, mention of the, 

214. 
Frederic, the emperor, the tricks he 

and another necromancer played 

each other, 251. 
Frederic, elector of Saxony, lauded, 

310. 
Free-will discussed, 117 — 123. 
Friars, anecdote of two, of rival 

orders, 214. 

George, the Elector, his cruelty 
towards the Lutherans of Oschitz, 
208. 

German nobles, their oppression of 
the poor, 339. 

Germany, her true policy against 
the Turks, 355, 357, 358. 

Germany likened to a mettlesome 
horse without a rider, 362. 

German intemperance, 334. j 

"Give, and it shall be given unto | 
you," this injunction commented 
on, 151. 

" Given for you," these words com- 
mented on, 168. I 



Glosses of the Fathers of no weight 
in comparison with Holy Writ, 3. 

Gnashing of teeth of the damned, 
what it is, 324. 

Goats, a sensible practice of, 314. 

God speaks himself with us in the 
Holy Scriptures, 20 ; his kingdom, 
what its " mysteries" are, 21 ; 
his dwelling phace, 24, 30 ; ex 
amples of his employing humble 
human agents in his works, 32 ; 
he never ultimately forsakes his 
people, ib. ; his counsels not to 
be canvassed by man, 30, 52 ; liow 
he might be rich, 33, 38 ; his 
benefits unheeded by man, 33, 39 ; 
his mode of punishing nations, 
ib. ; dcids hardly with his saints, 
34 ; desires only of us that we 
truly acknowledge him, 35,. 45 ; 
punishes us only for our own 
good, 35, 44; various significa- 
tions of the word in the Bible, 
36 ; difference between his dealing 
with man, and that of the devil, 
37 ; his greatest anger shown in 
his silence, ib.; and not wealth, 
maintains the world, ib. ; of what 
great charge to him is the main- 
tenance of merely the sparrows, 
40 ; his treatment of Adam and 
of his saints on earth, not to be 
canvassed by human reason, 42 ; 
his creatures to be used, but not 
all, 45, 58 ; his servants, who they 
are, 47 ; his mercy, how great it 
is, 49 ; must be worshipped solely 
and alone, 49 ; his apparent in- 
consistency, 50; in what way he 
is incomprehensible and invisible, 
ib. ; his creatures, uses of, 58 ; 
respecting him, 64; futility of 
heathen speculations, 64 ; his gifts 
abused by the possessors, 67 ; his 
service, easy work, 97 ; how a 
"jealous God," 126 ; to what sin- 
ners he is an enemy, 134 ; must 
be sought for by prayer, 160; how 
he conversed with the prophets, 
238 ; how wonderfully he eaables 
mere mortal creatures to combat 



382 



INDEX. 



the devU, 264 ; two ways in which 
he gives to the devil and witches 
power over men, 265 ; likened to 
a printer, 274; is the God of 
the humble and afflicted, 272 ; 
likened to a fisherman, 308 ; he 
is the maintainer of temporal 
government, 309 ; how he deals 
with princes, 313; his gifts ad- 
mirably distributed, 345 ; how he 
deals with countries and cities, 
361. 

God-fearing people exposed to witch- 
craft, 252 ; their tribulations, 
236. 

God's word, the fearful eN-il of hav- 
ing it taken from us, 6 ; its pos- 
session must not make us negli- 
gent, 7 ; it is revealed to the 
humble and to children, ib. ; ex- 
amples of the obscuration of, ib. ; 
assumption of a knowledge of, on 
the part of the worldly wise, 8 ; 
liow glorious a consolation it is, 
9 ; the contempt of, how fearful a 
plague, 14 ; should be entertained 
with assured belief, 17 ; a fiery 
shield, 19 ; its preachers must 
expect the cross, 19, 25, 60 ; 
ingi-atitude towards, even of the 
Lutherans, 20; the difi'erence 
between it and man's word, ib. ; 
alone teaches man to know God 
and his own heart, 23 ; how it is 
to be taught discriminatingly to 
various sorts of hearers, ib. ; what 
it has been at diiferent periods, 
25 ; poverty of its teachers, ib. ; 
its authority considered by the 
papists inferior to that of the 
church, 26 ; the contempt of, the 
greatest of all sins, 112 ; physic 
against spiritual tribulations, 260. 

God's works cannot be understood 
without a knowledge of God's 
word, 4; illustration of this 
proposition in Adam and Eve, ib. ; 
unsearchable and above aU human 
apprehension, 28. 

God's worship, what it consists in, 

a^i. 



Gospel,, periodical fallings off from 
the, 9 ; preached less powerfully in 
Christ's time than afterwards, 27 ; 
its wonderful preservation, 96 ; 
and the law cannot abide to- 
gether in one heart, 104; how 
it offends mankind, 108 ; con- 
trasted with the law, 132 ; weak- 
ness of its progress at first, 188 ; 
effect of its preaching in Luther's 
time, 297. 

Government, political, characterised, 
308. 

Gratian, failure of his attempt to 
confer worth on the decretals, 
212. 

Great men special gifts of God, 332. 

Great soldiers are not necessarily 
great statesmen, though many 
are so, 333 ; they do not desire 
slaughter for slaughter's sake, 
ib. 

Gregory, St., his similitude touching 
the Word of God, 7 ; an exposi- 
tion of his, 233. 

Hair, the greatest ornament of 
women, 307. 

Hammer, John, his theory of re- 
pentance condemned, 284. 

" Hardeneth whom he will," exposi- 
tion of this phrase, 49. 

Hatred and pride, characterized, 
115. 

" He slept with his fathers," scrip- 
tural meaning of this phrase, 237. 

Heart of man likened to a miU-stone, 
275. 

Heathen, the books of the, what 
they contain, 2 ; their imitation of 
the Hebrew temples, 30. 

Hebrew tongue, its peculiar energy, 
15 ; rich in allegories, 327. 

Hezekiah, reason of his fall, 243. 

Hell, definition of, 90 ; four sorts of, 
described, 324. 

Henry VIII. of England, an enemy 
only to the pope's person, 205. 

Heretics compared to comets, 56 ; 
defined, 217. 

Holiness, the two sorts of, 222. 



INDEX. 



383 



Holy Ghost, characterized, lOG, 109 ; 
commeucement of bis work, in 
giving courage to the apostles, 
107 ; sins against, described, 111. 

Hope, its universal influence, 146. 

Host, elevation of the, denounced, 
167 ; its origin, ib. 

Human traditions characterized, 
2-21. 

Humility before God, he that has it 
is saved, 86. 

Hussites, the, were wrong in admi- 
nistering the sacrament to young 
children, 162. 

Hj'pocrites, their humility is of all 
pride the greatest, 187. 

HyjpocrUa, the word criticised, 287. 

Idolatkt, origin of, 72 ; popish, 
defined, 68 ; denounced, 71. 

Innovators denounced, 285. 

Infidels, no intercourse to be held 
with them, 14. 

Ingratitude denounced, 292. 

Isaiah, the prophet, characterized, 
11, 12 ; why he was slain, 239. 

Jacob and Laban, the ricb man and 
Lazarus, 242. 

Jephtha, his foolish vow, 305. 

Jephtha's daughter, why it was she 

• bewailed her virginity, 305. 

Jeremiah, remark on his cursing the 
day of his birth, 153. 

Jeroboam, practical pei-petuation of 
the idolatry of, 71. 

Jerome, St., bis translation of the 
Bible, 2 ; a heretic, yet saved 
trough faith, 235. 

Jerusalem, the destruction of, 351. 

Jew, how the baptism of one should 
be conducted, 165 ; the body of 
one kept in spirits, 293 ; antiquity 
of their ceremonies superior to 
those of the heathen, 89 ; their 
notion about Christ"^ kingdom, 
91 ; their miserable condition, 
35, 352 ; number of, in Germany, 
347, 349 ; their boastings con- 
futed, 347, 348, 349; their per- 
versitv, 349 ; illustration of their 



inveterate hatred to Christ, 355 ; 
a hardened and vile race, 352 ; 
their great privileges of old, ib. ; 
eminent men then among them, 
353 ; a curious statue of one of 
their race at Cologne, ib. ; rea- 
son of their enmity to Christ, ib.; 
baptism of one by Luther, ib. 

Job, the book of, praised, 12 ; his 
similitude touching an angle-hook, 
commented on, 87 ; his sufierings 
not equal to David's, 241. 

John, elector of Saxony, lauded, 356. 

John, St., his majestic yet simple 
style, 1 3 ; his description of the 
kingdom of Antichrist, 194 ; pro- 
gress of his writings, 245. 

John the Baptist, St., his feast 
should be observed, 294. 

Jonah's a wonderful history, 239, 
40. 

Jonathan commended, 244. 

Joseph of Arimathea, what his faith 
was, 147. 

Jubilee, the year, remark upon, 220. 

Judas characterised, 288, 289, 290. 

Judges, the book of, characterised, 
12. 

Judith, the book of, criticised, 11. 

Justification discussed, 142 ; the 
ai'ticle of, unintelligible to here- 
tics, 147; its all-importance, 148 ; 
commented upon, 150. 

Justus Jonas, a question of his con- 
cerning certain sentences in Scrip- 
ture, 159. 

Kings, the book of, characterised, 
12; criticised, 243. 

Lands unblessed by God are b arrn, 
55. 

Last day, the, prayed for by Luther, 
325 ; probable period of, ib. 

Latomus, his theory, 282. 

Law, the, and the gospel, cannot 
abide together in one heart, 1 03- 

Law of Moses not binding on us, 
129; its office, 130; how God 
deals with it, ib. ; how it is used, 
ib. ; contrasted with the gospel, 



384 



INDEX. 



132; fibolished by St. Paul, ib.; 
how fiercely it was upheld by the 
Jews, ib. ; how terrible it is, 133 ; 
'tis altogether of the world, ib. ; 
is superseded by faith, ib. ; how 
it is to be met, 134; its use, ib. ; 
how it is to be distinguished, 135 ; 
wherein it is profitable, 136; liken- 
ed to a cloud without rain, ib.; is 
not wholly to be taken away, 139 ; 
and the gospel, upon whom each 
falls, ib. ; how they are to aid 
one another, ib. ; discriminated, 
141 ; the subjects to the, likened 
to the chesnut-tree, 173. 

Lawyers, their anger with Luther, 
338; denounced, ib.; their wisdom 
contrasted with that of divines, ib. 

Lazarus, the parable of, criticised, 13. 

Learning, its use to be carefully dis- 
tinguished from its abuse, 59 ; less 
in the world than before the deluge, 
65. 

Legends of the saints, the, are few 
of them pure, 328. 

Lending discountenanced, 68. 

Liber Gondliorum, the, criticised by 
Luther, 227. 

Life of man, the, likened to the sail- 
ing of a ship, 291. 

Lions' feast, fable of the, 8. 

Lord's prayer, the, effect of thoroughly 
appreciating it, 6 ; commented 
on, 156 ; an observation upon, 
159 ; it binds people together, ib. 

Lord's supper, the sacrament of, not 
understood by the papists, 166; 
characterised, 168. 

Luke, St., criticised, 16. 

Luther's memory, 9 ; his perfect ac- 
quaintance with the text of the 
Bible, 15; his conversion of Bullin- 
ger,ib.;his advice as to a selection of 
his works for printing, 21 ; how as- 
siduously he had to study divinity, 
27 ; how misrepresented by the pa- 
pists, 63 ; his indifference to worldly 
interests, 64 ; his translations of 
tlie Bible soon neglected by the 
people, 68 ; his misgivings, 101 ; 
what he relied upon, 138 ; his cha- 



rity, 1 51 ; his intellect quickened 
by anger, 152 ; his occasional de- 
jection, 153 ; his preachers ill- 
treated by the world, 182 ; excom- 
municated by the pope every 
Maundy Thursday, 1 84 ; his heavy 
burden as a preacher, 185 ; his 
direct mode of taking the pope 
by the throat, 186 ; his vexations 
at the hands of his younger bre- 
thren, 187 ; the chief reason wby 
he fell out with the pope, 203 ; 
inadequacy of his vehemence 
against the pope, 206 ; the humi- 
lity of his aspect favourable to his 
cause, in rendering him contemned 
by the pope, 207 ; naturally hated 
by tlie papists, 208 ; the hiird la- 
bours he had undertaken, 221 ; 
anecdote of a mass holdeu by him 
at Erfurt, 224; wherein the strength 
of his case against the pope lay, 
240 ; a threat of his to tlie pope, 
260 ; his contests with the devil, 
261 ; his exliilaration of spirits, 
■while writing against the pope, 
266 ; how he answered the devil, 
ib. ; based his preaching on the 
gospel solely, 269 ; how he an- 
swered the devil, 270 ; his tribula- 
tions, 273, 4, 6 ; in his tribula- 
lations was glad to talk even with 
a cliild, 275 ; or to rush out among 
his pigs, ib. ; his open preaching, 
276 ; his releasing a woman of 
Eisenach from a devil, ib. ; a 
consolatory letter of his to Dr. 
Benedict Paul, 277; very great ad- 
herence to his doctrine, 293 ; his 
feelings respecting his death, 319; 
how he had merited death, 320 ; 
a prayer of his, 321 ; a letter of 
his to Charles V. about the war 
with the Turks, 360 ; his mother, 
her annoyances at the hands of a 
witch, 252. 

Lutheran preachers, their auditors 
characterized, 188. 

Lutherans, can hold no peace 
with the papists, 201 ; their de 
mands, 209 ; their devotion to 



INDEX. 



385 



their cause, 275 ; aie uot heretics, 

312. 
hying, universality of, among the 

papists, jestingly illustrated, 313. 
Lyra's Corumentaries praised, 234. 

Maccabees, the book of, condemned, 
11. 

Magdeburg, story of a citizen of, 
262. 

Magician monk, anecdote of, 251. 

Magistracy, a necessary state in the 
world, 309. 

Magistrates, likened to fish-nets, 
308 ; they are easily corrupted, 
309 ; what qualities they should 
possess, ib., and 310. 

Maladies proceed from the devil, 
250, 316. 

Mammon, its two properties, 66. 

Mankind, wonderful perpetuation of, 
by God's power, 28 ; never satis- 
fied, 34; why created at all, if 
not to remain innocent, ib. ; in 
their highest power, utterly weak 
without God, 39 ; their blindness 
to that which is really good for 
them, 40; but a tithe of belong 
to God, 41 ; unless they serve 
God only, serve the devil, 49 ; 
their monstrous luxury, 56 ; their 
enduring discontent, 59 ; they 
have the nature of wild beasts in 
eating, 60 ; various sorts of, in a 
religious point of view, 61 ; their 
want of faith in God, ib. ; their 
incessant quest after the uncer- 
tain and unattainable, 62 ; or, if 
attainable, evanescent, 63. 

Manichean and other heiesies 
against Christ, described, 85. 

Marriages, secret, decision respect- 
ing, 306. 

Marriage- contracts, decision respect- 
ting, 306. 

Married life, a desirable feature of, 
described, 298 ; eminence as- 
signed to it by Scripture, and by 
the Fathers of the church, 302 ; it 
is the Batural tendency of man- 
'dnd, ib. 



Martin, St., his admirable death, 
320. 

Mass, denounced, 69 ; Luther's dif- 
ficulty in performing its antics, 
. 168 ; to oppression of consciences, 
ib. ; how Popedom rests upon it, 
223 ; 'tis a falUng rock, ib. ; de- 
nounced, ib. ; its position in 
France, ib. ; how it was celebrated 
at Milan, ib. : why it ought to be 
abolished, 224 ; firmly adhered to 
by the papists, 225 ; Luther's own 
early attachment to it, ib. ; deri 
vation of the term, ib. 

Maternity a glorious thing, 298. 

Matrimony enjoined upon all God's 
creatures, 297 ; lauded, 298 : 
preliminary considerations to, set 
forth, 299 ; the substance is the 
consent of the bride and bride- 
groom, 305. 

Matrimonial questions, ministers of 
the gospel should not interfere 
in them, 306. 

Matthew, chapter v., what Christ 
teaches in this GospeL 9. 

Mayer, Dr., encouraged by Luther 
against faint-heaitedness in preach- 
ing, 345. 

Maximilian, the emperor, his super- 
stition, 313. 

Melancholy the work of the devil, 
260, 270. 

Melancthon, Philip, his Common- 
place Book commended, 21 ; what 
he merited at the hand of God, 
311; characterized, 344. 

Mendicant orders, their great power, 
213; their ignorance, 214. 

Men and women discriminated, 299. 

Mental disquietude brings on phy- 
sical maladies, 273. 

Metaphors, prevalence of in the 
German language, 327. 

Minckwitz, his oration in favour of 
astrology confuted, 342. 

Miracles, how soon they ceased to 
produce an effect, 63. 

X iracles of Christ, occasion for, 
99. 

Misnian, anecdote of a rich, 8. 



386 



INDEX. 



Moloch, wor^^Lip of, described, 70. 

Monasteries, wealth of the, 198. 

Monks, an instance of their cupidity 
being frustrated, 198 ; their igno- 
rance illustrated, 200 ; their num- 
bers destructive of their patron 
the pope, 202 ; their comfortable 
suppers, 213. 

More, Sir ThomaS; a cruel tyrant, 
312. 

Moses, who wrote the books of, 17 ; 
observations upon his historical 
narratives, 58 ; how terrible he is 
with his Law, 138; rejected by 
Luther, 134 ; his prayer at the 
Red Sea, 158 ; his prohibition 
to question the dead, 250. 

Muck, virtues of, 41. 

Music and singing commended, 348. 

Musician of Mohlburg, carried off 
by the devil, 267. 

Nativities rejected, S 12. 

Natural incliuations characterized, 
116. 

Neighbour, what our love towards 
him should be, 151 ; and how we 
should help him, ib. 

Nicoela, counsel of, weakened by the 
Arians, 228. 

Nightingale and frogs, a simile de- 
rived from, 368. 

Nuns, instances of the profligacy of, 
307. 

Obediexce to God, what it is, 295. 

Occam praised, 236. 

Occasion, esseutialitv of not missing 

it, 363. 
Og, king of Basan, story of, 351. 
Olive tree, tlie, likeness between it 

and the church, 173. 
Opera Supererogationisdiefiiiedi, 222. 
Opportunities must not be lost, 368. 
Onsen, an opinion of his touching 

saints, 260. 
Original sin, how its effects have 

been mitigated by God's mercy, 

46 ; the occasion of universal 

degeneration, 58; defined, 110; 

characterized, 116. 



Osiauder, his easy position, 188. 

Palmer, Dr. John, his preaciiing 
criticised, 182. 

Papa, derivation of the word, 196. 

Papal benefices characterized, 330. 

Papists, their imitation of the hea- 
then idolatry, 73 ; their preaching, 
197 ; are mere idolaters, 201 ; 
they naturally hatei> Luther, 208 ; 
various fallacies of the, confuted, 
209 ; their false pretension to 
austerity of life, 219 ; their into- 
lerance of reproof, 362. 

Paradise, application of the vord, 55. 

Parents and magistrates, their rule 
compared, 308. 

Patience an excellent physic, 153 ; it 
is acquired by faith, ib. ; inculcated 
by Luther upon a citizen of Wit- 
tenberg, 154; commended by the 
ancients, ib. 

Patriarchs, disappearance of the le- 
legends of the, 54 ; their tribula- 
tions greater than those of later 
saints, ib. ; their strong faith, 64; 
their excelling holiness, 237; their 
polygamy explained, 314. 

Paul, St. characterized, 10 ; his 
desc tion of Christ, ib. ; his 
weal.;'ess of f.ith, 101 ; conver 
sion uf. 111 ; to what extent he 
set aside the law, 133 ; his exer- 
tions against the law, 142 ; how 
he speaks of the law, ib. ; his 
weakness in faith, ib. ; his read- 
ings of the Old Testament, 192. 

Persia, the king of, his great power, 
355. 

Peter Lombard criticised, 235. 

Peter, St. his supremacy denied, 16~ ; 
why he is more esteemed by the 
papists than St. Paul, 244; argu- 
ment agaiijst his having ever been 
at Rome, ib. 

Philosophy, though good in herself, 
is not to interfere with divinity, 23. 

Physic may be used, 257. 

Physicians, observations upon, 317. 

Pilate, his imprisonment of .lesus 
Chi-ist, 10; a just judge, 310; a 



INDEX. 



387 



question respecting his conduct 
towards Jesus Christ, 311. 
Pilgrimages referred to, 14. 
Pope, his enmity to Christ, 85 ; ex- 
communicated hy Lutherauism, 
175 ; his bull is not Christ's ex- 
communication, J.j8 ; shown to 
be anticlirisr,^lP3 ; he is a ten-es- 
trial God, 195 ; his exaltation of 
himself above God, ib. ; his immi- 
nent downfall, 190 ; his ignorance 
of the Bible, ib. ; his cupidity, 
198 • countries wherein his au- 
thority has never prevailed, ib. ; 
likened to a cuckoo, 199, 206 ; 
a blasphemy of his, touching the 
immortality of the soul, 200 ; 
his aim is the temporal mo- 
narchy of the world, 201, 202; 
utter imposture of his claims to 
infallibility, 202 ; his counterac- 
tion to God's Word, 203, 204 ; 
decay of his majesty, 205 ; he is 
butliead of the false church, 206 ; 
he is a mere picklock and cheat, 
207 ; he is God's ape, 213 ; his 
covetousness, 210 ; shown to 
be an ai-ch heretic, 217; he acts 
counter even to his own laws, 
ib. ; an earthly god, 228 ; a 
reason why he would not yield in 
any point to the protestants, 229 ; 
would hang St. Peter, and crucify 
Christ himself, did either, coming 
upon earth again, deny his supre- 
macy, 234 ; his law merely club- 
law, 240 ; decay of his power, 331. 

Popish ceremonial prayers con- 
demned, 157. 

Prayer, its potent infli;ence, 155 ; 
genuine, described, 157. 

Preachers of God's Word, their po- 
verty, 25 ; themselves poor sin- 
ners, 34 ; must be at first vehe- 
ment in their denunciation of the 
ungodly, 50 ; must be men of 
lofty courage, 62 ; an especial 
duty of, 75 ; maintenance of, 
180; should not be tedious in 
their discourses, ib. ; how treated 



by God, from Moses down to 
Luther, l8l ; their higher du- 
ties, ib. ; source of their power in 
the pulpit, ib. ; qualities necessary 
to them, 182 ; their defects made 
the most of, ib. ; they must be 
both soldiers and shepherds, 183 ; 
the over-confident always hum- 
bled, ib. ; the enmity of the laity 
towards them, 184 ; they should 
speak deliberately, ib. ; their hard 
position on earth, 185 ; should 
adapt their oratory to their hearers, 
ib. ; should be always self-possess- 
ed, ib. ; should not aim at worldly 
honours, ib., 187 ; should be both 
logicians and rhetoricians, 188, 
they must be properly maintained, 
189 ; under what circumstances 
they should marry, 297 ; should 
not employ languages which their 
hearers do not understand, nor 
high-flown phraseology, 185,191 ; 
they must be endued with a lofty 
spirit, 186 ; an instruction de- 
rived from, 191 ; what ministers 
should preach at court, ib. 

Predestination, disturbing effect of 
the theory of, 43 ; condemned, 279. 

Prierio, Sylvester, bis attack upon 
Luther, 188. 

Priests, consecration of, by the pa- 
pists, mere blasphemy, 46. 

Princi^s, their disregard of God in 
undertaking their enterprizes, 310; 
they themselves give example for 
the misconduct of their subjects, 
312 ; their want of order in their 
household administration, 313 ; 
how God deals with them, ib. 

Prophets, compilation of their books, 
12; how they <'ouversed with 
God, 23^ : difficult to translate, 
241. 

Promise to Adam, the, when made, 
242. 

Prudentius' hymns praised, 233. 

Psalm, the 110th lauded, 13 ; the 
second, Luther's lo\e for, 4^. 

Publicity of life commended, 63. 



388 



INDEX. 



Purgatory is not mentioned by Scrip- 
ture, and does not extend beyond 
this world, 226. 

Pythagoras, his theory as to the mo- 
tion of the stars, 41. 

Eavens and spaiTOws, why men- 
tioned in Scripture, 368. 

Reason, an excellent means in pure 
hands, 34. 

Eeformation, the mere word odious 
to the papists, 208 ; how long it 
had been needed, 210. 

Relics, popish, ridiculed, 197, 199, 
207, 363. 

Remedies, royal, observations upon, 
317. 

Remission of sins, the gospel of, little 
heeded, except under tribulation, 
23. 

Reproduction of mankind, a great 
mystery, 307. 

Resurrection from the dead, its cer- 
tainty shown, 44 ; a sermon of 
Luther's on, 322 ; an emblem of 
in alchymy, 326. 

Rhetoric of no value without logic, 
326. 

Righteousness, true, defined, 148. 

Rulers must inflexibly maintain the 
laws, 308; they must hold the 
gospel in honour, ib. ; who are 
ungodly, will necessarily have un- 
godly counsellors, 309. 

Rome, the church of, inferior in an- 
tiquity to otlier churches, 1 73 ; 
a den of covetousness, 210 ; cha- 
racterized by Bembo, 362. 

Romish laws, defunct with Rome 
herself, 227. 

'Sacramext in one kind, first intro- 
duced by the council of Constance, 
166 ; vindication of by the pa- 
pists confuted, ib. ; by whom it 
may be received, 167. 

Sacrifices, the manner of, acceptable 
to God, 47 ; two sorts of in the 
Old Testament, 206. 

Saints, hardly dealt with by God, 



on earth, for their own salvation, 
34; invocation of, mere idolatry, 
73. 

Samson and Julius Cassitr compared, 
332. 

Sanctification open tv all, the 
weak as well as th3 strong, by 
faith, 143. 

Saul, what the vision wao iLat ap- 
peared to him at Endor, 2o0. 

Schenck, Jacob, condemned, 116 ; 
his preaching condemned, 284. 

Schismatics defined, 217. 

School divines criticised, 4. 

Scipio, lauded, 310. 

Sermons, of little use for children, 
124. 

Serpent, the, degeneration of by 
reason of the fall, 58. 

Servants, their iudocility, 64. 

Service of God, defined, 296. 

Ship of the church, the little, a 
popish device, 219. 

Sigisniund, the emperor, how he 
was gulled by the papists, 281. 

Simeon, ground of his great joy, 97. 

Sins, why permitted by God, in his 
saints, Adam, David, &c., 31 ; 
characterized. 111 ; never escape 
punishment, unless duly repented, 
113; forgiveness of, ib. and 116; 
confession of, 115 ; classes of, ib.; 
we should not be without the 
feeling of them, 260; discrimi- 
nated, 271 ; a question touching 
their connexion, in Scripture, 
with physical maladies, 315. 

Sinners discriminated, 38 ; preachers 
should know how to distinguish 
them, 184. 

Sleep, a salutary operation of na- 
ture, 316. 

Solitude, favourable to sin, 279. 

Solomon, explanation of the Scrip- 
tural account of his wives, 301. 

Solomon's Proverbs, the book of, 
criticized, 11. 

Sophistry, defined and denounced, 
138 ; denounced, 292. 

Spanheim, an abbot of, his sorceries. 
250. 



INDEX. 



389 



Sparrows denounced, 3C8. 
Speech, a special gift of God, 22. 
Spiritual haughtiness deprecated, 

190 ; persons, not subject to the 

temporal authority in spiritual 

matters, 162 ; livings not to be 

usurped, 216; physic, comment 

on, 316. 
Sponsors in baptism, the prohibiting 

them to marry their god-children 

absurd, 305. 
Stephen, St., his death lauded, 294. 
St. George, legend of, expounded, 

327. 
Strange gods, a question of Carl- 

stad respecting, answered, 74. 
Students in divinity, how to be main- 
tained, 330 ; entitled to support, 

331. 
Study, directions as to, 344. 
Suicide, the direct work of the devil, 

254. 
Suicide of a girl, in order to escape 

violence, a question respecting 

the, 303. 
Swans, Aristotle's description of 

them, an emblem of the church, 

368. 

Tacitus, his description of Germany, 
361. 

Teachers of the gospel, how spoken 
of in the Scriptures, 49. 

Tecla, legend of, criticised, 329. 

Temple, destruction of the, explain- 
ed, 349. 

Temporal government, how it is pre- 
served, 309. 

Temptations of man, how regarded 
by God, 40 ; the devil may not 
repeat the same temptation upon 
the same person, 260. 

Ten commandments, Luther's diffi- 
culty in understanding them, 5 ; 
God's measuring lines, 20. 

Terminists, their views, 235. 

Testament, New, brevity of the ser- 
mons in, 13 ; Old and New, cha- 
racterized, 140. 

" The spirit is willing," &c., this 
sentence commented on, 149. 



Tetzel, Cochlaeus, &c., coDdemned, 
2.^0, 281. 

Texts, the necessity of mastering, 15 

Theologian, a perfect one, how con 
stituted, 3. 

Theology, facilities for the study o^ 
aflbrded by Melancthon and Lutheij 
21. 

Thirty-eighth year of one's life, the 
a dangerous epoch, 819. 

Thomists, their views, 235. 

Thrace, the stone of, described, 367 

Toad, the, useful properties of. 316" 

Tobit, the historv of, criticised, 11, 
12. 

Translators should not work alone, 2. 

Tribulations, a necessary discipline 
for the student in divinity, 27 ; 
how to expel them, 266 ; two sorts 
of, 270 ; they are good for us, ib. ; 
how they are to be resisted, 271 ; 
necessarj' to make us think of God, 
272 ; all men cannot equally en- 
dure them, ib. ; of faith, the great- 
est of all, 273 ; various degrees of, 
275 ; should be cheerfully sub- 
mitted to, 286. 

Trinity, the Holy, emblemed in all 
creatures, 74; described, ib. 

Truth, her great power, 13 ; where 
she is to be found, 93 ; rejected by 
the world, 344. 

Turks, the, are subtle enemies, 
354 ; their great power, ib. ; how 
they might be conquered, ib. ; 
their condition at the siege of 
Vienna, ib. ; the emperor of the, 
his great pomp, 357 ; his victories 
over the Germans, ib. ; their reli- 
gious claims and creed, 359 ; dis- 
cipline of their annies, ib. ; Lu- 
ther's prophecy that they would 
reach Rome, 360; a passport in 
use among them, ib 

Ungodly, the, their fair show in the 

eye of the world, 5. 
Uxor, derivation of the term, 367. 

Venetians, the, characterized, &57, 
362. 



390 



INDEX. 



Victories are given by God, 332. ! 

Vigils, anecdote in relation to, 262. 

Vincent, St "^i? admirable death, 
319. 

Virgin Mary, her case the sole ex- 
ception to the general rule, 299. 

V'jolence deprecated, 333. 

Vocation, necessity of, 180; com- 
mented on, 363. 

Wab, the greatest of plagues, 332. 

Water, warm, may it be used in 
baptism ? 165. 

Weak in faith, the, belong to Christ's 
kingdom, 96. 

Wealth, practical futility of, 37, 67; 
not to be relied on, 65, 67 ; leads 
to sins, 67. 

Wetzell condemned, lf)2, 281. 

"Whoso keepeth my saying, shall 
never see death," exposition of 
this sentence, 31 S. 

Wickedness of man, a question why 
God suffers it co exist, 29 ; the 
workers of, have the best of it in 
this life, but not hereafter, 36, 
44 ; of man, various kinds of, 60 ; 
it is so great that man, if he 
could, would willingly set aside 
God altogether, ib. 

Wildferer, a magician, inecdote of, 
251. 

Wisdom of man, its utter imperfec- 
tion, 104; natural, under what 
circumstances a good, 144. 

Witches, Luther's animosity to them, 
251. 

Witchcraft, high treason against God, 
251 ; the devil's own work, 260. 

Wittenberg, the church and school 
of, bitterly hated by the devil and 



his servants, 330 ; assertion of its 
authority, 338. 

Wives, what they should be, 300. 

Wolsey, Cardinal, jest about him, 
199. 

Works, good, of no avail without 
faith, 43 ; a question of Carlstad's 
respecting, answered, 69 ; futi- 
tility of, without faith, 72 ; not re- 
quisite for salvation, 137, 147; 
righteousness of, denounced, 154, 
155. 

Workers of holiness, false, de- 
nounced, 70. 

World, wickedness of the, 9 — 38 ; 
it would be empty in twenty years 
but for the constant birth of chil- 
dren, 59 ; compared to a decayed 
house, 63; how it is governed, 
138 ; remains the world it was of 
old, 203 ; what have been its best 
days, 361. 

World to come, what is it to be? 54, 
322, 323 

Worldly immortality, and not hea- 
venly, the aim of man, 63. 

Worsuip of the papists, the, has a 
fair but fallacious exterior, 218. 

Worship, Christian, what it is not, 
294 ; what it is, 296. 

Women, domination of, deprecated, 
300 ; satires upon them de- 
nounced, 303 ; more fervent in 
faith than m^n, 367 ; must not 
set up for wisdom, ib. 

Wurtzburg, the prebends of, and 
their women cooks, 216. 

ZuiNGLius, his all but certain con- 
demnation, 324. 






«f 



f :t 

MAR 1381 



MLDFCRO, MAaS, 






