Cornell University Library 
BR332.L6 M24 1865 



Luther's letters to women / collected by 



olln 




3 1924 029 254 798 




Cornell University 
Library 



The original of this book is in 
the Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924029254798 



LUTHER'S 

LETTERS TO WOMEN, 

Collected by 

DR. K. ZIMMERMANN. 

Translated by 

MRS. MALCOLM. 



LONDON: 
CHAPMAN AND HALL, 193 PICCADILLY. 

1865. 



LONBOH : 

IKVET AND CO., PKINTER8, GREAT NEW STREET, 

FETTER LANE, B.C. 



PREFACE. 



These Letters of Luther, collected by Dr. K. Zira- 
mermann, and given by him as a Whitsuntide 
offering to the German Protestant woman-world, 
I now present as a Christmas gift to the women 
of England. 

Among them a few, perhaps, may be looked 
upon as trifling, others as curious and interesting, 
whilst some are beautiful ; but all bear testimony 
to the simple, earnest faith, deep piety, and loving 
heart of this great and good man, showing how 
his religion was interwoven with his every-day 
life, and that his family affections were particu- 
larly strong. His Will has been introduced by 
Dr. Zimmermann as a further proof "that the 
man who stood at the head of his time did not 
forget his household ties." 

In Luther's character were marvellously com- 
bined the most opposite qualities — dignity and 
earnestness with simplicity and playfulness ; bit- 



iy Preface. 

terness and severity with long-suffering and cha- 
rity; sternness with gentleness and tenderness. 
There may occasionally be found in the Letters 
a certain degree of coarseness ; which must not 
be regarded as peculiar to Luther, but as belong- 
ing to the times in which he lived. 

I venture to bring this little book before the 
English public in the hope that it may prove of 
some use, in this age of weak and wavering faith, 
by recalling to the memory, the character and 
writings of one who has left so bright an example 
of the power of that steadfast faith which is " the 
victory that overcometh the world." 



CONTENTS. 



LETTER 






PAQE 


I. 


To Maegaret DncHESs of Brunsawck 


1 


II. 


To THREE BANISHED CoURT DaMSELS 


i 


m. 


To A Noble Lady in a Convent 


8 


IV. 


To some Nuns .... 


10 


V. 


To Katheeine Schutzin . 


. 14 


VI. 


To Maria Queen of Hungary . 


. 16 


vn. 


To Frau Dorothea Jorger 


. 21 


vni. 


To Else von Kanitz . 


23 


IX. 


To Elizabeth, Wife of Agricola 


25 


X. 


To Frau Felicitas von Selmenitz 


27 


XI. 


To Margaret N. . . . 


29 


XII. 


To Frau Goritzin . 




32 


XTTT. 


To his Wife 




33 


XIV. 


To Katherine Hornung 




37 


XV. 


To the Wife of J. Jonas 




40 


XVi. 


To his Wife 




42 


XVII. 


To his Wife . 




44 


xvm. 


To HIS Wife 




47 


XIX. 


To THE Wife of Matthew Zell 


49 


XX. 


To Barbara Lischnerin 


, 


51 



vi Contents. 



LETTER PAQE 

XXI. To HIS Mother 57 

XXII. To HIS Wife 64 

XXIII. To Feau Dokothea Joegee . . 68 

XXIV. To Frau von Stockhausen . . 71 
XXV. ToFrauJorger .... 73 

XXVI. To Frau Jorgeb .... 75 
XXVII. To THE Abbess of Hervord, in West- 
phalia. Written together with 

Melancthon .... 78 
XXVni. To Frau JbRGER . . . .81 

XXIX. To his Wife 83 

XXX. To an Unknown Person . . .85 

XXXI. ToFrauJorger .... 87 

XXXII. To the same ■ 89 

XXXIII. To the same 91 

XXXIV. To HIS Wife 93 

XXXV. To AN Unknown Person ... . 95 

XXXVI. To the Duchess Elizabeth of Beuns- 

wiCK 97 

XXXVII. To Ursula Schneidewin, at Stoll- 

beeg 99 

XXXVni. To the same 102 

XXXIX. ToTHE Duchess Katheeine of Saxony 105 
XL. To Dorothea, the Wife of B. Mack- 

ENEOT, AT Eossla, Luthee's Sistee 107 
XLI. To THE Duchess Elizabeth of Bruns- 
wick 109 

XLII. TotheDuchessKatheeine OF Saxony 111 

XLIII. To his Wife 113 



Contents. vii 



LBTTER 


PAGE 


XLIV. To THE SAME 


115 


XLV. To THE SAME 


117 


XL VI. Luther's Will .... 


118 


XL VII. To THE Widow of J. Cellarios 


124 


XL VIII. To ONE UNKNOWN .... 


126 


XLIX. To THE Electress Elizabeth of Brand- 




enburg 


130 


L. To the same 


131 


LI. To THE Electress Sibylla of Saxony 


133 


LII. To THE SAME 


136 


Liil. To THE Wife of Jerome Baumgart- 




NER, AT Nuremberg . 


138 


LIV. ToFrauJorger . . . . 


142 


LV. To THE SAME ..... 


144 


LVI. To THE Widow of George Schulzen 


146 


LVII. To AN Aged Couple 


148 


LVIII. To his Wife 


151 


LIX. To the SAME 


154 


LX. To the same 


156 


LXI. To the same 


158 


LXII. To THE same 


160 


LXIII. To THE same 


164 


LXIV. To THE same 


166 



fut!)jr'0 fetters t0 li0iiteii. 



LETTER I. 

To Margaret Duchess of Brunswick 
December 1519. 

Luther dedicates to the Duchess, who was very fa- 
vourable to the new religious movement, some writings, 
which in the letter he calls sermons. 

To my gracious lady, her Serene Highness and 
high-horn Princess Frau Margaretta, horn Von 
Ritberze, Duchess of Brunswick and Lunehurg, 
I, Martin Luther, Augustiner at Wittenberg, 
hy the help of all God's good gifts to me, pre' 
sent Ood's grace and peace in Christ our Lord. 

High-born Princess and gracious Lady, — 
some of my good friends, Patners and Supe- 
riors, have suggested to me to dedicate some- 

B 



Luther's Letters to Women. 



thing spiritual and Christian to your Princely 
Grace, that I may thus thankfully acknow- 
ledge the gracious condescension and favour 
that your Princely Grace shows towards my 
unworthy self, and thus tender you my hum- 
ble service. To this I have often felt bound 
in duty, yet have been deterred by the feel- 
ing of my own insufficiency to fulfil this de- 
sire and duty, especially as I hold it certain 
that our Master, Christ, has been beforehand 
with me in the instruction of your Princely 
Grace. I have, however, at last allowed my- 
self to be moved by your Princely Grace's 
devotion to the Holy Scriptures, of which I 
have heard much, to cause to be dedicated 
to your Princely Grace some sermons on the 
holy, venerated, and comfortable sacraments 
of Repentance,^ of Baptism,^ and of the most 
sacred Body ;^ seeing that there are so many 
troubled and anxious consciences, as I myself 
have experienced, who do not recognise the 

^ Walch, Luther's Worhs, x. p. 1478. 
2 Id. X. p. 2592. 

^ Id. xix. p. 522. Zimmermann, Luther s Reform 
Writings, i. p. 392. 



To Margaret Duchess of Brwnswich. 3 

holy and full grace of the sacraments, nor 
know how to avail themselves of them ; but 
endeavour presumptuously to satisfy them- 
selves with their own works, rather than seek 
God's favour and peace in the holy sacraments. 
Thus, by man's teaching, the holy sacraments 
have been veiled and withdrawn from us. I 
beg your Princely Highness will graciously 
accept this my small service, and not be 
angry at my presumption; for I am at all 
times ready submissively to serve your Princely 
Grace, whom I commend to God both here 
and hereafter. Amen. 



Luther's Letters to Women. 



LETTER 11. 

To three banished Court Damsels. 
June 18, 1523. 

Duke Henry of Saxony, though not himself un- 
favourable to the Reformer, had, from fear of his 
brother Duke George, Luther's mortal enemy, banished 
three Court damsels, because Luther's writings had been 
found in their possession. On hearing this, Luther 
sends them this letter of comfort. 

To the honourable, virtuous damsels Hannah von 
Draschwitz, Milia von Olsnitz, and Ursula 
von Feilitzin, my special friends in Christ. 

Grace and peace in Christ to you, 
honourable, virtuous, and dear damsels. Herr 
Nicholas von Amsdorf^ has acquainted me 
with the trouble and contumely that you 

' Nicholas von Amsdorf was one of the first and 
most zealous adherents of Luther. After being pro- 
fessor at Wittenberg, he became superintendent at 
Magdeburg, then Bishop of Naumburg. He died super- 
intendent at Eisenach. 



To three banished Court Damsels. 5 

have experienced at the court at Freiberg^ 
on account of my books, and has also desired 
me to write you a letter of consolation. 
Although I consider you do not require com- 
fort from me, — and am, besides, disinclined to 
write to persons unknown to me, — ^yet I did 
not know how to refuse him. 

In the first place, it is my earnest request 
that you will set your hearts at rest, and 
neither do nor wish any thing evil to those 
who have ill-used you. As St. Paul teaches, 
in the 4th chap. Corinthians, 12th verse, — 
" Being reviled, we bless." Also, Christ says, 
in Matthew, 5th chap. 44th verse, " Bless them 
that curse you ; do good to them that hate 
you ; and pray for them which despitefuUy 
use you and persecute you." Thus do, con- 
sidering that you are enlightened by the 
grace of God, and they are blind and stub- 
born ; also that they do more injury to their 
own souls than all the world can do to them. 
You are, indeed, only too well revenged on 
them for acting unjustly towards you, as thus 
they rage and horribly rebel against God : 
• The Duke's court waa held at Freiberg. 



Luther's Letters to Women, 



it is rather fitting that you should pity them 
as mad, unthinking men, who do not see 
how deplorably they ruin themselves when 
they think to do you an injury. Wait, and 
let Christ act ; He will richly recompense 
your disgrace, and raise you higher than 
you could wish, if you will only leave all to 
Him. 

And even if you should feel in your con- 
science that you have given ground for this 
treatment, you need not therefore despair ; 
for it is a dear and good token that you have 
received Christ in repentance. Remember, 
also, that if you would do any thing against 
them, you could effect nothing ; for it is a 
godly matter for which you suffer, which 
God will allow no one but Himself to judge 
or avenge, as He says by the prophet Zaccha- 
rius, 2d chap. 8th verse : " Whoever toucheth 
you toucheth the apple of my eye." 

I can well believe that the poor blind- 
head, Dr. Wolf Stehlin,^ is master there ; 
but he will be placed under another sentence 
than he thinks, and, alas, will become con- 
1 An otherwise little-known enemy of Luther's views. 



To three banished Court Damsels. 7 

scious ' of it all too soon. Do thus, my dear 
sisters, and keep your friends to the same ; 
so will God's grace and peace be with you. 
Amen. 

Take my letter in good part. 

Maetinus Luthbk. 

Thursday after YUus^s-day, 
1523. 



Luther's Letters to Women. 



LETTER III. 

To a Noble Lady in a Convent. 
December 14, 1523. 

The occasion for this letter is shown by its contents. 

Grace to you and peace, honourable and 
dear maiden Hannah. I have received your 
letter ; and, as you desired, I have diligently 
helped to promote your projected marriage, 
both through Herr S. von K. and others who 
might desire advice, that it may be brought 
to a right and just end. God knows, that as 
far as in me lies, I would willingly aid any 
one in much smaller matters, if I were ca- 
pable of it. I hear — not unwiUingly — that 
you are disposed towards the married state. 
But I cannot conscientiously decide on such 
matters, being absent. For as it concerns 
more than one person, God has forbidden us 
to judge on the solicitation of one party ; 
and herein, like yourself, I regard neither 
noble nor plebeian. One man is as worthy 



To a Noble Lady in a Convent. 9 

as another, if they have only mutual inclina- 
tion and love, so that the Evil One may not 
deceive them. 

Have no doubt, therefore, should it 
happen that I am near, or am asked con- 
cerning it, that I will say the best for it, and 
every where help to promote what is right 
and just. For as I discover that you have 
a desire for it, if no injury should occur to 
any one else by it, it shall be on my part 
unopposed and unhindered. Only see that 
you seek God's blessing, and that you are 
moved not alone by idle worldly love, but by 
his grace and favour ; for I wish you to be 
united with your dear lover in His grace. 
Amen. 

Maetinus Luthee. 



Monday after Luda, 1523. 



1 Luther's Letters to Women. 



LETT'ER IV. 

To some Nuns. August 6, 1524. 

Advice as to leaving the Convent. 

To the Independent Nuns, my dear Sisters in 
Christ, a friendly letter. 

Grace to you, and peace in Christ Jesus 
our Saviour. I have from time to time received 
your letters, and entered into your troubles, 
and would long ago have given an ansvyer, if 
I had been moved thereto, and had a mes- 
senger been at hand ; but I had in other 
■ways much to do. First, have you rightly 
understood that there are two grounds for 
abandoning convent life and vows 1 one is, 
where the regulations of men and convent 
work are compulsory, and not voluntary, and 
the conscience is thereby burdened ; this is the 
time when one should escape, and leave the 
convent, and let all things go. If, therefore, 
it is the case with you that the convent work 
is not of your own free will, but a burden to 



To some Nuns. 1 1 



your conscience, then call upon your friends 
to help you out and, if the authorities will 
allow it, provide for you in their homes or 
elsewhere. If your friends or parents will 
not consent, let any other good people help 
you, without regard to whether your parents 
should be made angry thereby, — should die, or 
recover from it. For God's will and the sal- 
vation of the soul should be before all things, 
as Christ says : " He who loveth father or 
mother more than Me, is not worthy of Me." 
But if the sisters were willing to leave you 
free, or, at least, to allow you to read or hear 
the Word of God, you must remain, and 
do and perform the convent duties, such as 
spinning, cooking, and the like, provided that 
you set no value on it. The other ground 
is the desires of the flesh, however you 
women -folk are ashamed to acknowledge 
this ; yet it is to be found in Scripture and 
experience. As, for instance, eating, drink- 
ing, waking, and sleeping are appointed by 
God, so does He will also that naturally man 
and woman shall live together in matrimony ; 
therefore is this sufficient, and no one need 



12 Luther's Letters to Women. 

be ashamed of it, as God has created and 
made him to this end ; so that where there is 
not high and rare grace, he may go forth 
and do that for which he is adapted by 
nature. All these things you will abund- 
antly and sufficiently read and learn, if you 
come out and hear good sermons. For I 
have fully proved and set forth these things 
in the book on Cloister Vows ■} item, on 
Eschewing the Teaching of Men f item, in 
a Sermon on Married Life ;^ item, in the 
Postilla,^ which, if you read, you will find 
sufficient instructions in all points, whether it 
be confession or other things, which are far 
too long and unnecessary to write ; because 
I foresee that you will leave the convent, 
whether you are affected by both or only 
one of these reasons which you put forth in 
your complaint. If it should come to pass 
that the convent should attain to true free- 
dom, then those who have grace and liking 

1 Walch, xix. p. 1816. 2 Id. six. p. 712. 

3 Id. X. p. 706. 

•* Chwrch Po8tilla,'m xi.-xii. vols., by Walch ; ^owse 
PostUla, in xiii. vols. 



To some Nwns. 13 



for it may well enter there, even as now the 
Council at Berne, in Switzerland, has opened 
the renowned Convent of Konigfeld, and 
allowed any maidens who choose to enter, 
remain, or go out freely, giving them back 
what they brought in. Herewith, God be 
with you ; and pray for me. 

Maktinus Luthbe. 



Given at Wittenberg, 
on the day of Ma/rtyr Sixtus, 1525. 



14 Luther's Letters to Women. 



LETTER V. 

To Katherine Schutzin. December 17, 1524. 

Luther congratulates this friend of the Lutheran 
teaching, who was of some importance in the history 
of the Eeformation at Strasburg, on her faith, and her 
marriage to the preacher Matthias Zell. 

To the virtuous lady, Katherine Schutzin, my dear 
sister and friend in Christ, at Strasburg. 

Grace and peace in Christ. My love, I 
give you joy that God has so abundantly 
given you his grace, that you not only per- 
ceive and apprehend his kingdom (which is 
hidden from so many), but also bestow your- 
self upon a man to whom you may always 
give ear, and from whom, daily and un- 
ceasingly, you may learn what is good ; and 
I wish you grace and strength to continue 
grateful for the same till that day when, 
God willing, we shall all see each other and 
rejoice. 

No more now. Pray to God for me, and 



To Katherine Schutzin. 15 

give my greeting to your lord, Herr Matthia 
Zell. Herewith, God be with you. 

Maktinus Luthbe. 

Swnday evenmg, after Service, 
1524. 



1 6 Luther's Letters to Women. 



LETTER VI. 

To Maria Queen of Hungary. 
November 1, 1526. 

Maria, sister of the Emperor Charles V., lost her 
husband, King Louis II. of Hungary, fighting against 
the Turks in the battle of Mohacz, She knew Luther's 
doctrines, and promoted their diffusion. The Psalms of 
Comfort which Luther dedicated to her were the 37th, 
62d, 94:th, and 109th.i 

To her most august Highness and high-horn Lady 
Frau Maria, horn Queen of Spain, &c,. Queen 
of Hungary and Bohemia, my most gracious 
lady. 

Grace and comfort from God our Father, 
and the Lord, Jesus Christ. Most gracious 
Lady and Queen, I had undertaken, by the 
recommendation of some pious people, to de- 
dicate to your Queenly Majesty the accom- 
panying four Psalms, as an exhortation that 
you should cheerfully and vigorously continue 

1 Walch, V. 1. 



To Maria Queen of Hungary. 17 

to advance the Holy Word of God in Hungary, 
becailse the good tidings came to me that 
your Queenly Majesty was inclined toward 
the Gospel, but that you were much hindered 
and thwarted by the Godless Bishops, who 
are powerful in Hungary, and are said to 
have most of the land there ; so that they 
have caused some innocent blood to be spilt, 
and terrible violence done against the truth 
of God. But now, alas ! affairs have changed, 
through God's power and providence ; the 
Turks having brought great sorrow and 
misery on your Queenly Majesty, by slay- 
ing your beloved husband, the noble young 
King Ludwig. I therefore am necessi- 
tated to change what I had purposed writing. 
Now, had the Bishop allowed the Gospel to 
spread, all the world would have cried out 
that this great misfortune had come to 
Hungary on account of the Lutheran heresy, 
which would have been a blasphemy. To 
whatever now they choose to give the blame, 
they may see, as I do, that God has hin- 
dered any reason from arising for such blas- 
phemy. 



18 Luther s Letters to Women. 

As St. Paul writes to the Romans, that 
the Holy Scriptures are for our consolation, 
and to teach us patience, I have on that ac- 
count proceeded to forward these same Psalms 
to console your Queenly Majesty — so far as 
God permits us consolation — in this great 
and sudden misfortune and misery with which 
the Almighty God has yisited at this time 
your Queenly Majesty, — not from anger or 
displeasure, as we may justly hope, but as 
trial and chastisement; that your Queenly 
Majesty may learn to trust alone in the true 
Father, who is in heaven, and comfort your- 
self with the true Bridegroom, Jesus Christ, 
who is also our Brother — nay, our flesh and 
blood; and enjoy yourself with the true friends 
and true associates, the dear angels, who are 
around, and take care of us. For although 
that death is so bitter to your Queenly Ma- 
jesty (and justly so), making you so early a 
widow, and robbing you of a dear husband, 
yet again the Scriptures, especially the Psalms, 
give much good comfort, and show abun- 
dantly the sweet-loving Father and Son, in 
whom lie concealed certain and eternal life. 



To Maria Queen of Hvmgary. 19 

And, indeed, whoever can arrive so far as to 
see and feel the love of the Father towards 
us, as shown in the Scriptures, can also easily 
bear all the misfortunes that may happen to 
him on earth. On the other hand, whoever 
does not feel this, cannot be truly happy, 
even though he floated in the midst of all 
the pleasures and enjoyments of the world. 
Indeed, no man can experience such great 
misfortune as God the Father Himself ex- 
perienced, in that his dearest Child was 
spit upon, cursed, and put to the most 
shameful death upon the cross, in return 
for all his wonders and loving deeds ; ne- 
vertheless, every one thinks his own mis- 
fortune the greatest, and lays it more to 
heart than the crucifixion of Christ, though 
He had been crucified ten times over. 
This is because we are not so strong in 
patience as God is ; therefore smaller crosses 
cause us more woe than the cross of Christ. 
But may the Father of mercy and God 
of all comfort console yoiir Queenly Ma- 
jesty, in his Son Jesus tlhrist, by his 
Holy Spirit, that you may soon forget this 



20 Luther's Letters to Women. 

misery, or be enabled to bear it manfully. 
Amen, 
Your Queenly Majesty's humble servant, 

Maetin Luther. 

At Wittenberg, 
On the \st of the winter month, 1526. 



To Frau Dorothea Jorger. 21 



LETTER VII. 

To Frau Dorothea Jorger. 
January 6, 1527. 

Cristoph Jorger, a Councillor of the Emperor Maxi- 
milian I., dwelling in Upper Austria, an adherent of 
Luther, had received the Esslinger preacher, Michael 
Stiefel, sent by him. On his return to Wittenberg, 
Luther writes this letter. 

To the noble and virtuous Frau Dorothea Jorger, 
widow, at Toilet, my best and true friend in 
Christ. 

Grace and peace in Christ our Lord. Vir- 
tuous lady, I have received Michael Stiefel 
with pleasure, and especially as you bear 
such good testimony of him, that he has 
shown himself so Christian-like towards you, 
and fruitful in good works, as I had expected 
of him ; and God has not caused my confidence 
to be put to shame. I, together with my Kate, 
thank you kindly for your dear and true 
gift. May God Almighty increase and keep 



22 Luther's Letters to Women. 

you graciously in his Holy Word, as He has 
begun, to the end. God will rightly overrule 
this tyranny to his praise and your salvation. 
Herewith, God be with y6u. Amen. 

Maetinus Luthee. 

On the Epiphany, 1527. 



To Else von Kanitz. 23 



LETTER VIII. 

To Else von Kanitz. May 2, 1527. 

Invitation to become instructress of girls at Wit- 
tenberg. 

To the honourable and virtuous maiden Else von 
Kanitz, now ai Eiche, my dear friend in 
Christ. 

Grace and peace in Christ Jesus. Honour- 
able and virtuous maiden Else, I have written 
to propose to your dear aunt Hanna von 
Plausig to send you to me for a time ; for I 
have thought of making use of you, to in- 
struct young girls, and that, in beginning 
such work, you may be an example to others. 
You shall be in my house and at my table, 
so that you may be exempt from dangers 
and cares; so I pray you not to refuse me. 
I hear that you are tempted with grievous 
thoughts by the Evil One. dear maiden, 
do not let such things frighten you ; for those 
who suffer from the devil here will not do 



24 Luther's Letters to Women,. 

so hereafter : it is a good sign. Christ also 
suffered thus, and many holy Prophets and 
Apostles, as is truly shown in the Psalter. 
Therefore be comforted, and bear willingly 
this rod from your Father; He will deliver 
you from it in his good time. When you 
come, I will speak to y(u further thereof. 
Herewith, God be with you. Amen. 

At Wittenberg, 
Sv/nday after Agap., 1527. 



To Elizabeth, Wife of Agricola. 25 



LETTER IX. 

To Elizabeth, Wife of Agricola} 
June 10, 1527. 

Letter of consolation. 

To the honourable and virtuous Frau Elizabeth 
Agricola, schoolmistress at Eisleben, my dear 
friend. 

Gkace and peace to my dear Elsa. I 
had wished to write to you earher, but Herr 
Matthes was gone sooner than 1 expected; 
and so I thought, that if your Herr Magister 
had returned home, it would, God willing, 
fare better with you. But you must not be 
so faint-hearted and despairing, remember- 
ing that Christ is near, and helps you to bear 
evil ; for He has not so forsaken you, as to 
give you up to your own earthly nature. 

' Johann Agricola was preacher at Eisleben. Lu- 
ther often called him jestingly "Magister Eisleben." 
He died general superintendent in the Marches. 



26 Luther's Letters to Women. 

Only call upon Him with earnest heart, and 
you may be assured that He will hear you, 
because you know that it is his nature to 
help, strengthen, and comfort all those who 
desire it of Him. 

Be therefore comforted, and think that 
He Himself has suffered far more for you 
than you can ever suffer on either your own 
or his account. We will also pray, and pray 
earnestly, that God will accept you in his 
Son Christ, and strengthen you in such weak- 
ness of body and soul. Herewith God be 
with you. Amen. Greet your Magister and 
all yours on all our accounts. 

Maetinus Luthee. 

Gwm on WhU-Monday, 1527. 



To Frau Felicitas von Selmenitz. 27 



LETTER X. 

To Frau Felicitas von Selmenitz. 
April 1, 1528. 

This lady, widow of a former Captain Wolf von 
Selmenitz, at AUstadt, who had been murdered at 
Halle, had accepted the Evangelical doctrines, and re- 
ceived the Lord's Supper in both kinds. In 1527, she 
came with her son for some time to Wittenberg ; but 
went back to Halle on account of the plague. There 
the archbishop called upon her either to give up her 
faith, or to abandon Halle. Of this she complained to 
Luther, and received the following letter from him. 

To the honourable, virtuous Frau Felicitas von 
Selmenitz, widow at Salle, my dear friend in 
Christ. 

Grace and peace in Christ our Lord and 
Saviour. Honourable and virtuous lady, I 
have learnt your trouble. Christ will be 
with you, and not abandon you. As, how- 
ever, you inquire of me whether you should 
flee or remain, I think you are at liberty to 
flee with a good conscience, if you have re- 



28 Luther's Letters to Women. 

ceived permission from the authorities; but 
yet I would rather you should delay a while, 
till you obtain certain news whether the car- 
dinal wiU come, that it may not be thought 
you wish to flee before the time and without 
reason : yet I leave it all to your good plea- 
sure. God Almighty strengthen you and 
all the brothers and sisters at Halle, accord- 
ing to his Godly will. 

Maetinfs Luthek. 

At Wittenberg, 
Wednesday, \st April 1528. 



To Margaret N. 29 



LETTER XI. 
To Margaret N. December 15, 1528. ; 

Consolation on the death of her husband. 

Geace be to you and peace in Christ. 
Honourable and virtuous lady, your son N. 
has informed me of the sorrow and misfortune 
that has come upon you in the death of your 
dear lord ; therefore I am moved by Chris- 
tian love to write you this letter of consola- 
tion. 

First, it should comfort you, that in the 
severe conflict which your lord has sustained, 
he has at last and finally conquered and won 
Christ. Furthermore, that he has departed 
in his senses, and in Christian acknow- 
ledgment of our Lord, which I myself have 
beyond measure gladly and joyfully heard. 
For Christ Himself struggled in the Garden, 
and yet at last conquered, and rose from the 
dead. 

But though your lord wounded himself. 



30 Luther's Letters to Women. 

it may be that the devil has power over the 
limbs, and has thus forcibly moved his hand 
against his will. For if he had done it wil- 
fully, he would not have returned to himself, 
and been converted to such an acknowledg- 
ment of Christ. How often does the devil 
break an arm, a neck, a back, and all the 
limbs ! He may have power over the body 
and the Hmbs without our will. 

Therefore you may and ought to be con- 
tented in Grod, and count yourself amongst 
those of whom Christ says (Matthew v. 4) : 
" Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall 
be comforted." All saints should sing the 
22d verse of the 44th Psalm : " For thy 
sake are we killed all the day long, and are 
counted as sheep for the slaughter." We 
must have sorrow and misfortune, if we are to 
partake of consolation. 

Thank G-od also for this great mercy, 
that your lord did not remain in conflict and 
despair, as happens to some, but was by God's 
grace powerfully rescued, and was at last 
taken in Chtstian confession and faith : of 
whom it is ^id : " Blessed are they that die 



To Margaret N. 31 

in the Lord." And Christ Himself says (John 
xi. 26), " He that believeth in Me, though 
he were dead, yet shall he live." Herewithj 
may God the Father console and strengthen 
you in Christ Jesus ! Amen. 

Maetinus Lutheb. 

At Wittmberg, 
Tuesday, Lucia, 1528. 



32 Luther's Letters .to Women. 



LETTER XII. 

To Frau Goritzin. May 5, 1529. 

Bequest to the wife of a judge at Leipzig to be 
sponsor in Baptism of Luther's daughter, called Magda- 
lene. 

Grace to you, and peace in Christ, 
honourable and Tirtuous lady. Dear friend, 
God having granted that a young heathen 
should be born to me and my dear Kate, I 
pray you for God's sake to do us the kindness 
to help this same poor heathen to become 
a Christian, and to be her spiritual mother, 
that she may, by your service and help, throw 
off the old birth in Adam, and obtain to the 
new birth in Christ, through holy Baptism. 
Be assured that I will return your good oflBces 
as you may desire. Herewith, God be with 
you. Amen. I myself have not ventured to 
go out into the air. 

Martinus Luther. 

1529. 



To his Wife. 33 



LETTER XIII. 
To his Wife. October 4, 1529. 

Luther informs her of the result of the Marburger 
conference, which had been brought about by the 
Landgrave Philip of Hesse, in order to unite the Swiss 
Eeformers with the Wittenbergers. 

Geace to you, and peace in Christ. 
Herr Kate,^ know that our friendly confer- 
ence at Marburg has come to an end, and 
we are on almost all points united, except 
that our opponents maintain that it is mere 
bread in the Lord's Supper, but acknow- 
ledge the presence of Christ therein spiri- 
tually. Now the Landgrave is trying to 
bring us to unanimity, or, in case we con- 
tinue to disagree, to bind us together as 
brothers and members of Christ. To this 
effect he is working eagerly ; but we care 
naught for brothers and members ; all we 

1 A name frequently applied in jest by Luther to 
Katherine. 

D 



34 Luther's Letters to Women. 

wish is peace and good -will. I think that 
to-morrow, or the day after, we shall break 
up, and go to an honourable gentleman at 
Schl, in Voigtland, whither his Electoral 
Princely Grace has called us. 

Tell Herr Pommer^ that the best argu- 
ments were those of Zwinglius,^ that "cor- 
pus non potest esse sine loco ; ergo Christi 
corpus non est in pane ;"^ and those of Oecko- 
lampadius :* the " Sacramentum est signum 
corporis Christi."^ I thought that God had 
bUnded them, so that they would advance 
nothing. I have much to do, and the mes- 

1 Johann Bugenhagen, of Pomerania, — on that ac- 
count generally called by Luther Pommer, — a trusty 
assistant of Luther. He was professor at Wittenberg, 
and then general superintendent in Electoral Saxony. 
He died at Wittenberg, 1558. 

2 Huldreich Zwinglius — bom 1484 ; first Eeformer 
at Zurich — was killed at the battle of Cappel, 1531. 

^ "The body cannot be without place ; therefore the 
body of Christ is not in the bread." 

* Oeckolampadius (Hausschein), born 1482; pastor 
and professor at Basle. Died 1531, seven weeks after 
Zwinglius. 

^ "The Sacrament is the token of the body of Christ.'' 



To his Wife. ■ 35 



senger is in a hurry. Say good night to all, 
and pray for us, We are all fresh and sound, 
and live like princes. Kiss Lensgen and 
Hansgen^ for me. 

Your devoted servant, 

Maetinus Luthek. 

The day of Frarwisms, 1529. 
P.S. Johann Brenz,^ Andreas Osian- 

' These two children were born — Magdalene 1529, 
and Hans 1526. Magdalene died 1542; Hans, as 
Chancery Counsellor at Konigsberg, 1575. In Luther's 
Tdble-Talk we are told how he behaved during the ill- 
ness and death of Magdalene. When she was lying very 
sick, he said to her, " Magdalene, my little daughter, 
thou wouldest willingly remain with the father here, 
yet gladly goest to the Father yonder ?" She answered : 
"Yes, dear father, as God wills it." As she was dying, 
he fell on his knees by the bed, weeping bitterly, and 
praying that God would redeem her. She then passed 
away in her father's arms. When she lay in the coffin, 
he said, " It is a wonderful thing, though feeling assured' 
of all being well with her, and that she is at peace, one 
should yet feel so sorrowful." 

2 Johann Brenz, born 1499; Eeformer in Halle, in 
Swabia ; died 1570. 



36 Luther^ s Letters to Women. 

der,^ Dr. Stephan,^ from Augsburg, are come 
here. 

Every one here has become mad with fear 
of the " sweating sickness."^ Yesterday fifty 
were taken ill of it, of whom one or two hare 
died. 

1 Andreas Osiander, bom 1498; preacher at Nurem- 
berg. Died, as professor at Konigsberg,- 1552. 

2 Stephan Agricola, confessor to the Empress Anna, 
then Evangelical preacher at Nuremberg and Eisleben. 
Died 1547. 

^ An epidemic that was known under the name of 
the " English sweating sickness." 



To Katherine Hornung. 37 



LETTER XIV. Y 

To Katherine Hornung. February 1, 1530. 

Wolf Hornung had been banislied by the Elector 
Joachim of Brandenburg. The long separation from 
his wife had occasioned money disputes between them. 
These Luther sought to compose. 

To the Honourable Lady, Katherine Hornung, at 
Collen on the Spree. 

Grace and peace in Christ, honourable 
and dear lady. You may rest assured that 
what I now write to you is at the request 
and desire of your husband, Wolf Hornung. 
Your conscience may truly tell you, that you 
cannot be safe under the knavish and worth- 
less contract which was given to you, and 
extorted from Wolf Hornung (as he says) ; 
nor can you, on account of it, claim the pro- 
tection of your sovereign, nor use it, as it is 
clearly against the Word of God to interfere 
in disputes betwixt husband and wife. There- 
fore, the master who arranged this contract 



38 Luther's Letters to Women. 

for you, and did not scruple at such a trick, 
absented himself, and has wished to draw 
his head out of the noose, and to shove the 
whole affair off upon Hornung ; but does not 
see that he has fallen into the trap himself. 

Now, you know, you have committed such 
great and horrible wickedness and offence 
against your husband, and carried on such 
robbery, withholding from him yourself and 
child, and depriving him of house and home, 
his property and his honour, besides having 
driven him into misery ; so that he is ex- 
posed, like a poor beggar, to great want and 
poverty ; added to which, he has for more 
than four years, as a young man, run the 
risk of danger to his soul : which sins will 
all fall upon your own head and neck, and 
will oppress you ; besides which, you have 
often been called upon, entreated, and prayed, 
yet have not come. Therefore it is necessary 
that the matter should be treated in another 
way. It is right that you should know that 
I think Wolf Hornung may loose himself 
from you as from a pubhc adulteress, if you 
do not comport yourself otherwise, that he 



To Katherim Hornwng. 39 

may be enabled to begin a fresh life, wherein 
he may remain, and not pass his time wan- 
dering in perpetual exile. 

Therefore I fix a time within which you 
may bethink you how you ought to act, 
namely, the approaching mid-Lent, that is, 
Latare Sunday ; meanwhile, you may act as 
you choose. After Latare, you shall (God 
willing) have another small letter to read. 
Is the poor Wolf Hornung to suffer such rob- 
bery 1 Well, Grod, who has more than He 
can ever bestow, will give him another wife, 
child, house, and home, possessions and 
honour. With this knowledge, you may 
decide for yourself. God deliver you from 
your sins, and bring you to a right feeling ! 
Amen. 

Given at Wittenberg, 
February 1, 1530. 



40 Luther's Letters to Women. 



LETTER XV. 

To the Wife of J. Jonas} April 24, 1530. 

Grace to you, and peace in. Christ. Dear 
Frau, Doctor, and Godmother, I have read 
your letter to Herr Doctor Jonas, and am 
well pleased that God has given you a cheer- 
ful spirit and good hope, both with respect 
to the prospect of having a child, and to the 
damage done to your house. Your lord is 
not so light of heart, but is very anxious 
concerning you; and is angry, and scolds 
and curses lustily about the puUing down of 
the house, and bears with great impatience 
living as near the planks as, on account of 
the space, he is obliged to live. But be com- 
forted; you shall have no trouble about the 
house, as the affair has been arranged. I 
hope, also, that God will graciously help you 
through your time of trouble, and give you 

1 Justus Jonas, born 1493, pastor at Halle ; after- 
wards superintendent at Erfurt, where he died, 1555. 



To the Wife of J. Jonas. 41 

twins : but I think it will be a little daugh- 
ter. These are such strange creatures, and 
struggle so, that a large house is too small 
for them ; even as the mothers also do, who 
make the world too narrow for a poor man. 
Give my greetings to your dear Jost and 
grandmother, and accept them yourself. 
Herewith, God be with you. Amen. 

Maetinus Luthek. 

Given at Goburg, 
on St. George' s-day, 1530. 



42 Luther's Letters to Women. 



LETTER XVI. 

To Us Wife. August 14, 1530. 

A short account of the Diet at Augsburg, and of 
Luther's health. 

Grace to you, and peace in Christ. My 
dear Kate, this messenger is in such haste 
to depart, that I have no time to write any 
thing, but do not hke to let him go without 
a few hnes from me. You may tell Herr 
Johann Pommer, and all, that I will soon 
write more. We have as yet no news from 
Augsburg, but expect every hour a letter. 
We have flying reports that the answer of 
our opponents will be publicly read ; but 
they would not give any copy to our party, 
that they might answer it. I do not know 
whether . this is true. Where the light is 
thus shunned, our friends will not long re- 
main. Since Lorenzo -day I have been 
almost well, and felt no swimming in my 
head, which has made me quite brisk in 



To his Wife. 43 



writing. I had before been much plagued 
by this dizziness. Greet all for me : more 
another time, God be with you. Amen. 
Pray hopefully, for the work is well begun, 
and God will help. 

Maetinus Luther. 



Given on Sunday after 
Lorenzo-daiy, 1530. 



44 Luther's Letters to Women. 



LETTER XVII. 

To his Wife. August 15, 1530. 

To he delivered into the Jumds of my dear Herr 
Frau Katherine Luther. 

GrKACE to you, and peace in Christ. My 
dear Kate, just as I had fastened up my 
letter, I received these from Augsburg ; so I 
detained the messenger, that he might take 
them with him. Prom them you will find 
that our concerns at Augsburg prosper, 
pretty much as I have said in other letters. 
Let Peter Weller^ read them to you, or Herr 
Johann Pommer. May God continue to help, 
as He has graciously begun. Amen. I can- 
not write more now, as the messenger sits 
ready to depart, and will scarcely tarry. 
Greet our dear Sack. I have read your 

1 Weller, probably a brother of Jerome Weller, who 
is mentioned in the 20th Letter, an intimate friend of 
Luther. Jerome died 1572, as superintendent at Frei- 
berg. 



To Ms Wife. 45 



letter to the Treasurer's wife, and she thanks 
you much. I have sent Hans Polner^ to 
Peter Weller : see that he comports himself 
obediently. Greet Hans Luther, and his 
schoolmaster, to whom I will soon write. 
Grreet cousin Lehnen,^ and aU the rest. We 
are eating here ripe grapes, although it has 
been very wet this month. Grod be with 
you all. Amen. 

Maetinus Luthee. 

Ex Eremo^ Assvmhptwn-day, 1530. 

P.S. It vexes me that our printer has 
so shamefully delayed the copies. I send 
these copies that they may be finished 
speedily, and they make winter fruit of 
them for me. If I had wished them to be 
laid aside, I should have kept them with me. 
I have written to you to take the sermon* 

1 A student recommended by Luther. 

2 A relation dwelling in Luther's house. 

* From the wilderness. Thus Luther called his 
residence at Koburg. 

^ On the duty of sending children to school. 



46 Luther's Letters to Women. 

from Schirlenz (if he has not begun it), and 
give it to George Ran.^ I can imagine that 
Schirlenz has not sufficient paper for his large 
edition. If you have not given it to the 
other, let it be done soon, and the sermon 
finished at the earliest. 

^ Two printers. 



To his Wife. 47 



LETTER XVIII. 

To Us Wife. September 24, 1530. 

To he delivered into the hands of Frau Katherine 
D. Luther, at Wittenberg. 

Grace to you, and peace in Christ. My 
dear Kate, I -wrote a letter to you yesterday, 
which I sent, together with one to our gra- 
cious lord, from which you will understand 
that our people at Augsburg are about to 
start. Then I hope, God willing, that we 
shall in a fortnight be with you at home, 
although I think our affair will not remain 
uncensured. But they have no power. They 
positively desire to have the monks and nuns 
again in the cloisters. Yet Rietesel has writ- 
ten that he hopes that they will part in peace 
on all sides at Augsburg. May God grant 
this ! it would be a great mercy. It needs 
that things should go well with us, as the 
Turks are upon us. You will hear further 



48 Luther's Letters to Women. 

from Hornung. Herewith, God be with you 
all. Amen. 

Martinus Luther. 

Cdbwrg, Sunday afler MattUas, 1530. 



To the Wife of Matthew Zell 49 



LETTER XIX. 

To the Wife of Matthew Zell. 
January 2i, 1531. 

This letter has reference to the position of Luther 
with the Strasburgers. 

To the virtuous wife of Matthew Zell, at Strashurg, 
my kind and dear friend. 

Grace and peace in Christ. My dear 
ladj, I have not hitherto answered your letter 
which I received long since, as I thought it 
was too soon whilst the affair was so new ; 
but as now (God be praised !) the bitterness is 
a little softened, I will enter upon your letter, 
that you may help to entreat both your 
lord and other friends, that (if it please God) 
peace and union may be preserved. For you 
know full well that love should be above 
all things, and have the precedence, except of 
God, who is over all things, and even above 
love. If He and his Word have the prece- 
dence, love will assuredly have the upper 



50 Luther's Letters to Women. 

hand with us, next to God. Such high things 
should not be undertaken by our own devices 
or zeal, but by hearty prayer and spiritual 
sighs ; for it is God's affair, not ours. God 
must do it ; our doing is nothing. Pray, 
pray, pray ; and let Him take care. Here- 
with, God be with you. Amen. Greet your 
dear lord for me. 

Maetintjs Luthee. 

Janua/ry 24, 1531. 



To Barbara Lischnerin. 51 



LETTER XX. 
To Barbara Lischnerin. April 30, 1531. 

Luther endeavours to relieve her doubts on pre- 
destination, 

Grace to you, and peace in Christ. Dear 
and virtuous lady, your dear brother Jerome 
Weller has made known to me how sorely 
you are troubled with temptation concerning 
eternal foreknowledge, which is truly grievous 
to me. May Christ our Lord deliver you 
from it. Amen. 

I know this malady well, and have lain in 
the hospital on account of it, being sick even 
to death eternal. Now will I, besides my 
prayers, give you counsel and comfort. In, 
such matters, writing is a weak thing ; but I 
will not desist, if God will give me grace for 
it. I will show you how God has helped me 
out of it, and by what skill I daily maintain 
myself against it. 

First, you must firmly fix in your mind 



52 Luther s Letters to Women. 

that such thoughts are assuredly the prompt- 
ings and fiery darts of the Evil One. The 
Holy Scriptures speak thus : " He who in- 
quires into the Majesty of the Most High 
will be cast down." Now, such thoughts 
are idle searchings into the Majesty of Grod, 
and would pry into his high Providence ; 
and Jesus the son of Sirach says, iii. 22 : 
" Thou shalt not inquire into what is too 
high for thee." But what God has com- 
manded, that do thou accept ; for it profits 
you nothing to gape after that which you are 
not commanded. David also pleads with the 
Lord, in Psalm cxxxi. 2, as though it would 
have fared ill with him, if he had exercised 
himself in great matters which were too high 
for him. 

Therefore, it is certain that these ideas 
come not from God, but from the devil, who 
plagues the heart therewith, that man may 
hate God, and despair ; all which God has 
strictly forbidden in the first commandment, 
and wills that we should love, trust, and praise 
Him by whom we live. 

Secondly : if such ideas beset you, you 



To Barbara Lischnerin. 53 

should learn to ask yourself : " Is it any where 
commanded, so that I should think of or act 
upon it V If there is no such command- 
ment, learn to say : " Avaunt, thou miserable 
devil ! thou wishest to drive me to take care 
of myself, though God every where tells me 
that I should leave it to Him to take care of 
me, and says, ' I am thy God !' — that is, ' I 
care for you' — " hold to Me therefore, and a- 
wait my bidding, and let Me take care of you." 
As St. Peter teaches (1 Peter v. 7) : " Cast 
all your care upon Him, for He careth for 
you ;" and David (in Psalm Iv. 22) : " Cast 
thy burden upon the Lord, and He shall sus- 
tain thee." 

Thirdly : if, nevertheless, these thoughts 
will not leave you (for the devil unwillingly 
desists), you must also not desist, but always 
turn your mind from them, and say : " Dost 
thou not hear, devil, that I will not have such 
thoughts? God has forbidden them. Avaunt 
thee ! I must now think on his command- 
ments, and let Him the while care for me. 
If thou art so clever in such matters, betake 
thee to heaven, and dispute with God Him- 



54 Luther s Letters to Women. 

self, who can sufficiently answer thee." Thus 
will you always drive him from you, and turn 
your heart to God's commandments. 

Fourthly : of all Grod's commandments, 
the highest is, that we shall take after the 
pattern of his dear Son, our Lord Jesus 
Christ, who should be our daily and most 
excellent mirror, wherein we see what great 
love God hath for us ; and how highly, in his 
infinite goodness, He has cared for us, in that 
He has given his dear Son for us. 

In this way, I say, one learns the true 
knowledge of predestination, and no other- 
wise ; thus will it be shown that you beheve 
in Christ. If you believe, you are called ; if 
you are called, you are also assuredly predes- 
tinated. Do not let this mirror and throne 
of grace ever be torn from the eyes of your 
heart ; but if such thoughts come and bite 
like fiery serpents, do not give heed to these 
thoughts or serpents, but ever turn away 
your thoughts, and contemplate the brazen 
serpent, that is, Christ given for us ; so, God 
willing, it shall fare better with you. 

But, as I have said, you will have to 



To Barbara Lischnerin. 55 

struggle, and ever shun such thoughts. If 
they find entrance, cast Ihem out again 
as you would speedily spit out any filth 
that had fallen into your mouth. Thus has 
Grod helped me ; for it is his urgent com- 
mand that we conform ourselres to his Son, 
in whom He has abundantly shown Himself 
to be our God (as the first commandment 
teaches), who helps and cares for us. There- 
fore He will not suffer that we should 
help or take care for ourselves : for that is 
to deny God, and the first commandment, 
ajid Christ. 

The miserable devil, who is the enemy of 
God and Christ, will drag us by such thoughts, 
contrary to the first commandment, from God 
and Christ, to rest on ourselves and our own 
care, that so we may take upon ourselves 
God's office, which is to care for us and be 
our God ; just as he desired to make Adam 
in Paradise equal with God, that Adam 
might be his own God, and take care of him- 
self, and thus rob God of this care and godly 
work, whereby Adam did so grievously fall. 

Thus much' have I now advised you, and 



56 Luther's Letters to Women. 

have desired your brother Jerome Weller to 
warn and admonish you with all diligence, 
that you may cast away such thoughts, and 
send them home to the devil, that he may 
fathom them ; who knows well how it fared 
with him before in a like case — namely, that 
he fell from heaven into the abyss of hell. In 
short, what is not commanded us should not 
distract nor trouble us ; it is of the devil, not 
Grbd. May our dear Lord Jesus Christ show 
unto you his wounds, and gladden your heart 
with his love, so that you may see and hear 
Him alone, until you become one with Him in 
joy I Amen. 

D. Maetinus Luthee. 

The last day of April 1531. 



To his Mother. 57 



LETTER XXI. 
To his Mother. May 20, 1531. 

Grace to you, and peace in Chri^ Jesus 
oui" Lord and Saviour. Amen. My beloved 
mother, I have received my brother Jacob's 
letter, with an account of your sickness ; and 
it grieves my heart, especially as I cannot be 
with you in person, as I would gladly be ; yet 
will I be, as it were, in person with you in 
this letter, together with all our family, and 
will assuredly not be away from you in 
spirit. 

Although I hope, that not only has your 
heart been long and abundantly instructed, 
and (God be praised !) perfected in his com- 
forting Word, but also that you have been 
provided with preachers and comforters, yet 
will I do my part, and, as in duty bound, 
show that I am your child, and recognise you 
as my mother ; as God our Creator has made 
and bound us to one another by mutual 



58 Luther's Letters to Women. 

duties, so that I may add myself to the num- 
ber of your comforters. 

First, dear mother, you know well God's 
mercy, and how that this your sickness is his 
gracious fatherly chastisement, and quite a 
slight one in comparison of that which He 
inflicts upon the godless, or even upon his 
own dear children, as one is beheaded, an- 
other burnt, and a third drowned, and so 
forth ; and we must all declare : " For thy 
sake are we killed all the day long ; we are 
counted as sheep for the slaughter" (Ps. xKv. 
22 ; Rom. viii. 36"). Therefore this sickness 
should not- afflict nor trouble you, but should 
be accepted with thankfulness, as sent of his 
mercy ; seeing how slight a suffering it is, 
even though it should be a sickness unto 
death, compared with the sufferings of his 
own dear Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, which 
He did not suffer for Himself, as we do, who 
must suffer for our own sins. 

Secondly, you know, dear mother, the 
true main point and foundation of our salva- 
tion, whereon should be placed our confidence 
in this and all troubles ; namely, the corner- 



To his Mother. 59 



stone Jesus Christ (Is. xxviii. 16; Rom. ix. 
33 ; 1 Peter ii. 6), who will not waver nor fail 
us, nor allow us to sink and perish. For He 
is the Saviour, and calls Himself the Saviour 
of all poor sinners (1 Tim. ii. 4), and of all 
who are in tribulation and about to die, who 
have relied on Him, and called on his Name. 

He saith : " Be of good cheer ; I have 
overcome the world." If He has overcome 
the world. He has assuredly overcome the 
prince of this world, with all his power. 
And what is his power but death, whereby 
He has prostrated us and made us prisoners 
on account of our sins 1 But now that death 
and sin are overcome, may we joyfully and 
cheerfully hear the sweet words : "Be of 
good cheer ; I have overcome the world"! 

And we must not doubt their truth ; but; 
as we are commanded, accept them with joy 
and comfort and thanksgiving. And he who 
will not be comforted by these words does 
the greatest injustice and dishonour to the 
dear Comforter, just as if it were not true 
when He bids us be of good cheer ; or as if 
it were not true that He has overcome the 



60 Lutlier's Letters to Women. 

■world : and thus we ourselves restore the 
tyranny of the vanquished devil, sin, and 
death, against the dear Saviour — from which 
God preserve us ! 

Therefore let us now rejoice in all security 
and gladness ; and should any thought of sin 
or death arise to frighten us, let us. raise our 
hearts, and say, "Behold, dear soul, what doest 
thou 1 Dear death, dear sin, why dost thou 
live and frighten me 1 Seest thou not that 
thou art conquered 1 and that thou, death, 
art dead 1 Knowest thou not One who has 
said of thee, 'I have overcome the world' 1 It 
becometh not me to listen or give heed to thy 
terrors, but only to the cheering words of my 
Saviour: 'Be comforted, be of good cheer; I 
have overcome the world.' He is the Con- 
queror, the true Hero, who hereby gives and 
appropriates his victory to me. Be of good 
cheer. On Him I rest, to his words and 
comfort I cling; thereby I remain here, or 
journey thither: He will not deny me. By 
thy false terrors thou wouldst gladly deceive 
me, and with lying thoughts would rend me 
from such a Conqueror and Saviour ; and they 



To Us Mother. 6lt 



are as surely lies, as it is true that He has 
overcome, and commanded us to be comforted. 
Thus, St. Paul also boasts and defies the ter- 
rors of death (1 Cor, xv. 54, 55) : 'Death is 
swallowed up in victory. death, where is 
thy sting 1 grave, where is thy victory V 
Frighten and irritate thou canst, like a wpodeu 
image of death ; but thou hast no power to 
destroy. For thy victory, sting, and power 
have been swallowed up in Christ's victory ; 
thou mayest show thy teeth, but thou canst 
not bite. For God has given us the victory 
through Christ Jesus our Lord, to whom be 
praise and thanks. Amen." 

With such words and thoughts, and none 
other, dear mother, you may set your heart 
at rest, and be thankful that Grod has brought 
you to such knowledge, and not allowed you 
to stick in the errors of Popery, by which we 
are taught, to rely on our own works and the 
holiness of monks, and to consider this our 
only Comforter and Saviour, not as a com- 
forter, but as a severe judge and tyrant, — to 
flee from Him to Mary and the saints, and 
not to expect of Him any mercy or comfort. 



62 Luther's Letters to Women,. 

But now we know far otherwise of the 
unfathomable compassion and goodness of 
our Heavenly Father, and that Jesus Christ 
is our Mediator (1 Tim. ii, 5) and stepping- 
stool of grace, and our Bishop in heaven be- 
fore God, who daily intercedes for us, and 
atones for all (Rom. iii. 25) who only call 
upon and believe in Him (Heb. iv. 16; 
vii. 25) ; and is not a severe judge, except to 
those who do not believe in Him, nor accept 
his comfort and grace. He is not one who 
accuses and threatens us, but who intercedes 
and atones by his own death, having shed 
his blood for us ; so that we ought not to fear 
Him, but approach Him with all assurance, 
and call Him dear Saviour, sweet Comforter, 
true Bishop of our souls (1 Tim. iv. 10 ; 
1 Pet. ii. 25). 

To such knowledge, I say, God has gra- 
ciously called you, whose sign and seal you 
have — namely, the Gospel, Baptism, and the 
Sacrament; you also hear preaching, so that 
you shall have no danger nor trouble. Only 
be comforted, and joyfully thankful for such 
great mercy; for He who has begun will 



To Us Mother. 63 



also graciously perfect it in you. But we 
cannot help ourselves in such matters — we 
can gain nothing over sin, death, and the 
devil by our own works; therefore there is 
One for us in our stead, who can do better, 
and give to us his victory, so that we accept 
and do not doubt thereof; and He says : " Be 
of good cheer ; I have overcome the world ;" 
and again : " Because I live, ye shall live 
also ; and your joy no man taketh from you" 
(John xvi. 22; xiv. 19). 

The Father and God of all comfort grant 
you, through his holy Word and Spirit, a firm, 
joyful, and thankful faith, whereby you may 
overcome this and all other trouble, and at 
last feel and experience that it is the truth 
when He Himself says : " Be of good cheer ; 
I have overcome the world." I herewith 
commend your body and soul to his mercy. 
Amen. All your children and my Kate pray 
for you. Some weep, others eat, and say 
grandmother is very ill, God's grace be with 
us all! Amen. — Your dear son, 

Martinus Luther. 

Sunday evening after Ascension Sunday, 1531. 



64 Luther's Letters to Women. 



LETTER XXII. 
To his Wife. February 27, 1532. 

Luther, being at Court on account of the illness of 
the Elector, writes from thence this letter. 

To be delivered into the hands of my dearly beloved 
wife, Katherine Luther. 

God greet you in Christ, my beloved Kate. 
. I trust, if Doctor Briicy permits, as he gives 
me hope he will, that I shall be with you to- 
morrow or the next day. God grant that 
He may bring us home fresh and sound. I 
sleep exceeding well about six or seven hours 
together, and then one or two hours after- 
wards. It is owing to the beer, I think ; but 
I am temperate, as at Wittenberg. Docto r 
Caspar^ says that , the canker in the foot of 
our most gracious lord does not spread fur- 

' Gregory Briich was Chancellor to the Elector. 
2 Professor of Theology and Court Preacher at Wit- 
tenberg. 



To his Wife. 65 



ther; but no Dobitzch,^ nor prisoner on the 
ladder in the prison of Hans the gaoler, ever 
suffered such martyrdom as his Electoral 
Grace suffers from the surgeons. His Princely 
Grace is as sound all over as a roach ; but 
the devil has bitten and stu ng his foot. Pray, 
pray yet more. ■ I hope tliat God will hear 
us, as He has already done ; for Dr. Caspar 
considers that none but God can help here. 
As Johannes^ will go away, it is necessary, 

1 Probably the name of some malefactor. 

2 On the same day, Luther wrote the following letter 
of recommendation for this servant : 

" I, D. Martinus Luther, preacher at "Wittenberg, 
beg, for Christ's sake, of all who love God's Word, that 
they will favourably recommend the bearer of this letter, 
Johannes Nischmann, who has faithfully, industriously, 
and humbly served me for some years, and that they 
will assist him to the utmost, on account of the Lord, 
for whose sake he has served me. As truly as our 
Gospel and Christ Himself are true, will this be, without 
doubt, a pleasing and acceptable service to God. And 
when I can return these good offices, I shall be always 
willing and ready to do so. Herewith, God be with you. 

" My own hand. 

" Tuesday after Reminiscer'e, 1532." 



66' Luther's Letters to Women. 

and honour demands, that I should let him 
depart in honour. For you know that he 
has faithfully and industriously served us, 
and demeaned himself humbly according to 
the Gospel, and done and borne all things. 
Be mindful how oft we have given to good- 
for-nothings and thankless scholars, on whom 
it has been thrown away ; therefore be liberal, 
and do not let such a pious fellow want, as 
you know that it is important, and pleasing 
to God. I know well that there is little in 
hand ; but I would gladly give him ten gul- 
den if I had them. But you should not give 
him less than five gulden, as he has no clothes. 
Give what more you can, I beg of you. There 
might, indeed, be given, out of consideration 
for me, somewhat out of the common chest 
to such a servant, seeing that I must keep 
my servants at my own cost for the service 
and use of the Church; but let them do as 
they please. Do not stint while there is a 
cup remaining. Think where you have 
gained it all. God will certainly give some- 
thing else^that I know. Herewith, God be 
with you. Amen, j 



To Ms Wife. 



Ask the pastor of Zwickau^ to make shift 
and be satisfied with the lodgings. When I 
come, I will relate to you how Miihlfurt^ and 
I were guests with Riedtesel,^ and Miihlfurt 
exhibited to me much knowledge ; but I was 
not in a mood for such drink. Fondle young 
Hansenfor me, and desire Hanschen,Lehnchen, 
and cousin Lehnen to pray for me and the dear 
Prince. I cannot find any thing in this town, 
although the fair is now going on, to buy for 
the children. If I bring nothing especial, you 
must get me somewhat. 

D. Maktinus Luthee. 

Tuesday after Beminisc, 1532. 

1 Nicholas Haussmann, one of Luther's truest friends. 

^ Burgermaster at Zwickau. 

^ Electoral Treasurer, and godfather to Luther. 



68 Luther's Letters to Women. 



LETTER XXIIL 

To Frau Dorothea Jorger. March 7, 1532. 

Answer to an offer of assistance to poor students. 

To the noble, virtuous Lady Dorothea Jorger, 
widow, at Toilet, my hind lady, and good 
friend in Christ. 

GrBACE and peace in Christ. Foble, vir- 
tuous lady, I have received your letter to me, 
together with the quince jam, as has also 
my dear Kate hers, with the four Hungarian 
gulden ; and we both thank you most kindly. 
I have also sent Herr Michel Stiefel his, and 
expect the answer every hour. As you in- 
quire in your letter how I think the five 
hundred gulden you purpose for poor stu- 
dents of the Holy Scriptures may best be 
applied, I have, together with Magistro 
Philippo} and other good gentlemen and 
friends, considered it best, as it is to be ap- 

1 Melancthon. 



To Frau Dorothea Jorger. 69 

plied to such a necessary and useful work, 
that it should be put out at interest, that it 
may be made useful for all time, and for 
many. For one can render good aid by 
means of such interest to two persons yearly, 
if the money is well invested ; and we will 
commend it to the control pf the University 
of Wittenberg, Afterwards, I took pains to 
write to Lazarus Spongier,^ Syndic at Nurem- 
berg, that he should inquire at Linz, through 
trusty agents (as he knows well how to do), 
for these gulden, and take them in virtue of 
your handwriting, which I sent him with 
mine (to be returned), begging him at the 
same time to exert himself tliat they may 
be booked and registered at the Town-hall at 
Nuremberg, which would be the most secure ; 
if not, to send them to me, that they might 
be other wise put-out. If this opinion pleases 
"youT tbe affair will be all straight. I will, 
for my own part, do the best I can, and 
rejoice that God has moved your heart to 
bethink you of such a good work in Christ. 
For, alas ! now among us, though God's Word 
' A faithful adherent of Luther. 



70 Luther's Letters to Women. 

be abundantly preached, almost to weariness, 
of such grace there appears little or next to 
nothing, but rather the reverse ; so that they 
leave their poor pastors almost to starve. 
Whether it be nobles, peasants, or citizens, 
every one is more inclined to rob than to 
help. But perhaps it is according to the 
proverb : " The nearer Rome, the worse 
Christian." And as Christ says in Matthew 
xii. 42 : " The queen of the south shall rise 
up in the judgment with this generation, and 
shall condemn it : for she came from the 
uttermost parts of the earth," &c. To the 
same dear Lord Jesus Christ I commend you, 
together with all yours, and to his abundant 
grace. Amen. 

D. Martinus Luther. 

Thwrsday after OeuU, 1532. 



To Frau von Stochhausen. 71 



LETTER XXIV. 

To Frau von Stochhausen. 
November 27, 1532. 

Luther gives her advice concerning the depression 
of her husband. 

To the honourable and virtuous Frau N. von 
Stockhausen, wife of the Captain at Nord- 
husen, my kind and good friend. 

Grace and peace in Christ. Honourable 
and virtuous lady, I have written in haste 
a consolatory note to your dear lord. Now 
the devil hates you both, because you love 
Christ, his enemy. For this He must com- 
pensate you, as He Himself says : " Because 
I have chosen you, therefore the world (and 
its prince) hateth you : but be of good 
cheer." The suflferings of his saints are pre- 
cious in the sight of God. As I am in 
haste, I can write little. Be careful not to 
leave your husband one moment alone, nor 
any thing with him whereby he might injure 



72 Luther's Letters to Women. 

himself. Solitude is poison to him ; there- 
fore the devil drives him to it. If you read, 
or tell him histories, news, and remarkable 
events, there is no harm, — even though there 
were sometimes idle or false tittle-tattle, and 
tales of Turks, Tartars, and the like, — if he he 
excited thereby to laugh and joke ; and then, 
speedily afterwards, cheering sentences from 
the Holy Scriptures. Whatever you do, 
leave him not alone, nor let there be silence 
around him, that he may not sink into 
thought. It does not signify if he is angry 
about it. Act as if it were disagreeable to 
you, and pretend to scold ; but let it be done 
all the more. This must content you, — in 
much haste. Christ, who causes you such 
sorrow of heart, will help you, as He has 
lately done. Only hold fast to Him. You 
are the apple of his eye ; whosoever touches 
it, touches Himself. Amen. 

DocTOE Martinus Luther. 

At Wittenberg, Wednesdeiy after 
St. Catherine, 1532. 



To Frau Jbrger. 73 



LETTER XXV. 

To Frau Jorger. May 6, 1533. 

On the subject of Letter XXIII. 

Grace and peace to you. Honourable 
and virtuous lady, your letter concerning the 
five hundred gulden, which ought to have been 
received at Linz last Easter, came to me too 
late. I have, nevertheless, according to your 
request, begged of and admonished Martin 
Seldener, through Herr Lazarus Spengler, that 
he would obtain a bill of exchange, such as is 
customary, and send it to Nuremberg. How- 
ever, I should have preferred, as I had before 
written, that you should yourself have for- 
warded it in the safest way you could ; 
having also observed from your letter, that 
you would be better pleased to give this 
alms out of hand to poor students than to 
put it to interest ; if you remain of this 
opinion, I will not dissent. 

You must not vex yourself, nor be dis- 



74 Luther s Letters to Women. 

turbed, because a preacher has given you 
anxiety, on account of your son and of the 
judge, as Herr Michel has informed me. Let 
them go to law with one another ; the affair 
does not personally concern you : the law 
will soon settle the business, and your con- 
science need not be troubled about it.-^ God 
be with you, and your dear children, and all 
yours. Amen. 

Your devoted 

D. Maetinus Luther 

(still ailing). 

Datum WiU&nJberg, 
May 6, 1533. 

1 Nothing more is known of this family concern. 



To Frau Jorger. 75 



LETTER XXVI. 

To Frau Jorger. October 24, 1532. 

On the subject of Letters XXIII. XXV. 

GrRACE to you, and peace in Christ. 
Noble and virtuous lady, I have to inform you 
that the five hundred gulden, in good solid 
coin, on your account, have arrived, through 
Wolfgang Seldener, at Leipzig, and have been 
forwarded by George Kirmeyer from thence 
to Wittenberg ; and I will dispense them 
according to your request and desire, not 
forgetting Herr Andres. And I have al- 
ready, with the advice of certain good friends 
and gentlemen, decided on the disposal of one 
hundred. But the same good gentlemen 
and friends have suggested, that if the other 
four hundred were put out to interest, and 
thus two exhibitions founded, two students 
would be assisted every three years. But I 
answered that, according to your letter, it 
was your will that they should be distributed 



76 Luther's Letters to Women. 

at once. They begged of me, however, to 
write, and ask you whether it was still your 
determination to distribute this money forth- 
with among these poor fellows who study the 
Holy Scriptures, or whether it might be used 
for the foundation of two perpetual student- 
ships, — ^which they consider would be for the 
best. According to their request, I therefore 
now write to you, and beg that you will once 
more write to me what you wish and think 
best, and I will faithfully execute it. Mean- 
while, in order that I may not show disre- 
spect to the request of these good gentlemen, 
the four hundred gulden shall remain in 
hand till I obtain your answer. Herewith, 
may God preserve you and all yours, and 
may He be well pleased with your faithful 
work to his praise and honour ! Amen. 

MicheP has experienced a small trial j 
but it will not injure him — rather, God be 
praised, profit him. 

D. Maetinus Luther. 

October 24, 1533. 

' Michel Stiefel had prophesied the near approach 
of the last day, and was in much trouble concerning it. 



To Frau Jorger. *7^ 

Receipt. 
I, Martin Luther, D. and Preacher at 
Wittenberg, acknowledge by this my hand- 
writing that 500 fi., in good solid coin, have 
been delivered to me here at Wittenberg in 
my little study, on behalf of the noble and 
virtuous Frau Dorothy Jorger, widow : to be 
distributed among poor fellows who study 
the Holy Scriptures, as she has begged me 
to do by letter. This money has been de- 
livered to me through George Fonwibler, 
citizen of Leipzig, agent of Andreas Kir- 
meyer, of Nuremberg. Done the 24th 
October 1530. Signed and sealed with my 
usual signet. 



78 Luther's Letters to Women. 



LETTER XXVII. 

To the Abbess of Eervord, in Westphalia. 
Written together with Melancthon. Jan- 
uary 15, 1534. 

Answer to the complaints of the Princess Abbess 
of encroachments on her rights. 

To the honourable, high-horn Lady, Anna Fraulein 
von Limpurg, Abbess of the chartered, noble 
Convent at Hervord, our gracious lady. 

Grace and peace through our Lord Jesus 
Christ. Honourable and high-born lady, since 
your Grace complains that certain persons 
at Hervord attempt to encroach upon your 
Grace's jurisdiction, and to obtain forcibly 
money and other privileges, know that I, 
Doctor Martinus, have always written and 
taught most diligently that the distinction of 
authority should be upheld, and that no one 
should seek to rule in another's jurisdiction, 
nor take or withdraw the revenue of others, 
or the like. Therefore the said proceedings, 



To the Abbess of Hervord. 79 

concerning which your Grace writes, we dis- 
approve ; and heartily wish that those who 
would thus violently act should bethink them 
that such conduct dishonours the holy Gos- 
pel, and causes it to be hated, which justly 
grieves every pious Christian. We have, 
therefore, written to Doctor Johann Dreger, 
and admonished and begged of him not to 
participate in such violence and injustice, but 
to censure such as would practise it, and ex- 
hort them to Christian love, which he, as 
preacher, is bound to do. But the desire of 
your Grace, that we should write to the - 
Council, we have considered not likely to be 
profitable, although we do not know exactly 
what the Church regulations at Hervord may 
be. But we beg of your Grace, in what con- 
ceri^f ^the necessary Church offices, to bear 
with patience the circumstances of these 
times, and not to seek your rights too sharply 
in every thing ; because your Grace knows 
that hitherto in many places the churches 
have been badly supplied both with parsons 
and with maintenance for them. If, however, 
certain fortunate changes should have hap- 



80 Luther's Letters to Women. 

pened in the exigencies of the Church, we 
beg that your Grace will nevertheless, for the 
sake of peace, have patience ; but we do not 
approve that certain persons should, contrary 
to the will of the authorities, take Church 
property for building the city walls. May 
God always preserve your Grace! The llfl. 
sent here by your Grace we return ; and are 
ever ready to serve your Grace. 

Maetinus Luther. 
Philippus Melancthon. 

Given ai Wittenberg, 
Thv/rsday, January 15, 1534. 



To Frau Jdrger. 



LETTER XXVIII. 

To Frau Jdrger. April 27, 1534. 
On the subject of Letter XXVI. 

Geace to you, and peace in Christ. 
Honourable and virtuous lady, I write to in- 
form you that — God be praised ! — ^your alms 
have been well laid out, and have given aid 
to many poor, arid dp so still ; and I cannot 
doubt that God, who has put it into your 
heart to do this, will openly show that it is 
well pleasing to Him as a precious thank- 
offering, whereby you acknowledge and 
praise the mercy which He has shown you 
through his Son Jesus Christ. May God 
strengthen you in steadfast faith, and happily 
accomplish the work He has begun in you ! 
Amen. I did not myself know, nor could I 
have believed, that there were in this small 
town and poor school so many clever and 
pious fellows, who have lived on bread and 
water, and have suffered cold and frost, that 

G 



82 Luther's Letters to Women. 

they might be able to study God's Word and 
Scriptures, to whom your alms have been a 
great comfort and refreshment. I have already 
dispensed above half, and received testimony 
that it has been given to upright fellows, not 
to worthless lads. I have not delayed telling 
you this, that you might know how your 
money is being spent; I have given to 
Andres more than the others: first 10 fl., 
then again 10 fl., and among the others 2, 3, 
and 4fl. each, according to the advice of 
good friends ; and they are all glad and 
thankful. This little book is sent you as a 
token, by , desire of Michel Stiefel, to whom, 
as he is without a benefice, I have given 10 fl.; 
and he greets you heartily. Christ be with 
you, and all yours. Amen. 

MAUTmus Luther, D. 

Monday after Jubilate, 1534. 



To his Wife. 83 



LETTER XXIX. 
To his Wife. July 29, 1534. 

From Court, where he is detained on account of 
the illness of the Elector. 

To my kind and dear master, Frau Katherine 
von Bora D. Luiherin, at Wittenberg. 

Grace and peace in Christ. Dear Herr 
Kate, I have nothing to write to you, as 
M. Philipp and the others are returning 
home. I must remain here longer, on ac- 
count of the pious Prince. You may judge 
how long I am likely to remain here, and 
bethink you how you may help to release 
me. I expect that M. Franciscus^ will relieve 
me, as I did him, but not so soon. Yesterday 
I had bad stuff to drink, and was made to 
sing. It is an annoyance to me to have bad 
wine to drink, when I remember what good 
wine and beer I have at home, besides a 
pretty wife— or, shall I say it, master ? You 

1 Franz Burkhard, Electoral Vice-Chancellor. 



84 Luther's Letters to Women. 

would do well to send over to me a whole cellar 
full of ray wine, and a bottle of your beer as 
often as you can ; for I shall not return till 
you have the new beer. Herewith, God be 
with you and our children, and all the folk. 
Amen. 

Your beloved, 

Maet. Ltjthee, D. 

Wednesday after Jacobi, 1534. 



To an Unknown Person. 85 



LETTER XXX. 

To an Unknown Person. March 7, 1535. 

Whether the Lord's Supper might be received in 
both kinds at home. 

God's grace to you, and peace in Christ. 
Honourable and virtuous lady, your dear 
brother N. has informed me how desirous 
you are of the holy Sacrament in both kinds, 
and doubtful whether you may receive them 
privately in your own house. 

Although there has been such a custom 
in Popedom, and the element has been ad- 
ministered in bouses at private mass, yet, for 
the sake of example, and other reasons, I 
cannot advise it. For in the course of time 
every one might so use it, that the general 
assembly and church would, thereby be aban- 
doned and deserted, so that it would no 
longer be a public and general profession. 
On the other hand, if it can be done, and 
you wish for it, and will venture, your con- 



86 Luther's Letters to Women. 

science approving, then do it, in God's name, 
to whom I recommend you in my poor 
prayers. 

D. Mart. Luthek. 

Given, Dominica Lata/re. 



To Frau J'drger. 



LETTER XXXI. 

To Frau Jorger. April 3, 1535. 
With reference to Letter XXVIII. 

Grace to you, and peace in Christ. Vir- 
tuous, honourable, and dear lady, Master An- 
dres has told me that he cannot go to you 
"without a letter from me, explaining that the 
air of this place does not suit his health, and 
drives him away : he will tell you all the 
circumstances. It is as the Scripture says : 
" Some are hungry ; others are full." With 
you there is a hunger and thirst for the 
Word of God ; with us many are so satiated 
and weary, that it must grieve God. Well, 
the world is the world ; God help us all. Your 
alms have, God be praised, helped many good 
people who study diligently the Holy Scrip- 
tures ; for many who have been driven from 
other countries for the Word's sake, and lived 
among us on bread and water, have been 
made glad, in that they have been enabled 



Luther's Letters to Women. 



by your alms to buy books, and sometimes 
clothing. It will be -well pleasing to Christ 
our Lord, who has put it into your heart to 
do it. I, as Master Andres will tell you, am 
sometime strong, sometime well, sometime 
joyful, sometime sad. But Christ is at all 
times the Lord, and will, shall, can, and must 
ever remain so. Amen. Master Michel Stie- 
fel has again a benefice, and is now better 
than before. Christ our dear Lord guard, 
strengthen, and prepare you and all yours 
for his blessed future, together with us all. 
We wish and gladly desire that He may come 
soon ; for the world will eyery where become 
wicked. This helps us to pray against this 
same world. 

Maetinus Luthee, D. 

Thiwsday after Amhrosius, 1535. 



To Frau Jorger. 89 



LETTER XXXII. 

To the same. September 12, 1535. 

Grace to you, and peace in Christ, with 
my poor Paternoster, &c. Revered and dear 
lady, I have heard Master Andres, and re- 
ceived your letter ; and I thank you for the 
gift, especially on account of the little gros- 
chen, although I would gladly be sure whether 
it were a genuine one, because it looks so 
new ; but it may be counterfeit, or a cast. 
Master Andres has also informed me that 
you would be glad to know whether, with a 
good conscience (if the pastor will allow it), 
you can have the Gospel preached for your 
own household alone, the other parishioners 
being excluded. If you have permission from 
the pastor to have it in the house, you may 
use it till you are prevented by force ; for 
you are not bound to interfere on behalf of 
others against the dictates of the authorities. 
Every one must take his own hazard, and 



90 Luther's Letters to Women. 

abide his own venture. For the rest, do not 
be disturbed if the preacher is not anointed 
and shaven by the bishop ; for they are not 
consecrated to the office of preacher, but for 
secret mass, and are priests of Baal and 
Jeroboam. He who is called is consecrated, 
and should preach to those who call him ; 
that is our Lord God's consecration, and the 
true anointing oil. My wife greets you and 
yours kindly. Herewith, God be with you. 
Amen. 

Maetinus Luthee, D. 

At Wittenberg, Sunday after the 
birth of our dear Lady, 1535. 



To Frau Jorger. 91 



LETTER XXXIII. 

To the same. July 13, 1536. 

She was anxious lest there should arise strife be- 
twixt her sons and daughters, on account of their ma- 
ternal inheritance. The daughters had resigned it ; but 
the mother wishes them to have an equal share with 
the sons, who would not agree to it. Luther gives his 
advice, and begs for the prolongation of maintenance 
to a person in need. 

To the much honoured noble lady, Dorothea Jor- 
ger, widow, at Keppach, my kind lady and 
good friend. 

GrKACB and peace in Christ. Much-hon- 
oured, dear lady, Master Andres Hechel has 
told me of your wish to make a will for the 
advantage of your daughters, but that your 
sons will not consent, because your daughters 
hare beforehand resigned both their paternal 
and maternal portion ; and you ask good 
counsel thereupon. My opinion is, that if 
you can further it with your sons by kind- 
ness, so that they may consent, it may be 



92 Luther's Letters to Women. 

accomplished ; but if that cannot be, and if 
your daughters have already resigned their 
claim, your conscience need not be troubled 
if you are not able to restore what they have 
given up. Therefore do not vex yourself 
therewith. 

Besides this, Master Andres has asked 
me to write and beg of you to extend your 
bounty to him till Easter, and thus enable 
him to continue his study this short space of 
time. Thus you will act kindly and Chris- 
tianly. Herewith, God be with you, and all 
yours. My better half, Frau Kate, sends 
you friendly greeting. 

Maetotts Luthee, D. 

At Wittenberg, Monday after 
St. Jacohi, IS536. 



To his Wife. 93 



LETTER XXXIV. 

To his Wife. February 27, 1537. 

Liither, from Gotha, informs her of an attack of ill- 



Grace to you, and peace in Christ. Dear 
Kate, you may for the present hire such 
horses as you are in need of; for my gra- 
cious lord will keep your horses, and send 
home M. Philipp with them. For I myself 
yesterday set out from Schmalkalden, and tra- 
velled from thence in my gracious lord's own 
carriage. The reason of this is, that I have 
not been in good health for three days, and 
have neither rested nor slept, nor been able 
to eat or drink. In short, I have been nigh 
unto death, and did commend you and my 
children to God and my good lord, as though 
I should never see you again. I had much 
pity for you, but had resigned myself to the 
grave. Now, however, the tears of many 
people and earnest prayers to God have so 



94 Luther's Letters to Women. 

worked, that it appears to me I am born 
again. 

Therefore thank G-od, and let the dear 
children and cousin Lenen thank the true 
Father ; for you would assuredly have lost 
this father. The pious Prince has set people 
running and riding and fetching, and tried 
to the utmost of his power to aid me ; but it 
was of no avail. Your skill and remedy, also 
have done nothing. God has done wonders 
for me, and has done it through the inter- 
cession of pious people. 

I write this to you, for I believe that my 
gracious lord has ordered the Land Vogt 
(Governor) to send you to me, lest I should 
die on the road, that you might ere that see 
and speak to me ; but it is now unnecessary, 
and you may remain at home, as God has 
so abundantly aided me, that I look forward 
to a joyful return to you. To-day we stay 
at Gotha. I have besides this written to you 
four times, and wonder much you have re- 
ceived nothing. 

Maetinus Luther. 

Tuesday after Bemirdscere, 1537. 



To an Unknown Person. 95 



LETTER XXXV. 
To an Unknown Person. May 24, 1537. 

Short letter of consolation, 

Grace and peace to my dear Frau N. 
I had wished to write to you earlier; but 
Master N. was gone sooner than I expected,, 
and I thought that if your lord had returned 
home, it would, God willing, fare better with 
you. But you must not be so faint-hearted 
and despairing ; but remember that Christ is 
near, and helps you to bear evil ; for He has 
not so forsaken you as to give you up to your 
own earthly nature. Only call upon Him 
with earnest heart, and you may be assured 
that He will hear you, because you know that 
it is his nature to help, strengthen, and com- 
fort all those who desire it of Him. 

Be therefore comforted, and think that 
He Himself has suffered far more for you 
than you can ever suffer on either your own 



96 Luther's Letters to Women. 

or his account. We will also pray, and pray 
earnestly, that God wiU accept you in his 
Son Christ, and strengthen you in such weak- 
ness of body and soul. Herewith, God be 
with you. Amen. 

Maetinus Luther. 

On Wldt-Monday, 1537. 



To the Duchess Elizabeth of Brunswick. ^"7 



LETTER XXXVI. 

To the Duchess Elizabeth of Brunswich. 
September 4, 1538. 

Thanks for a present — Sends some cuttings. 

GrEACE to you, aud peace in Christ. Most 
serene and high-born Princess and gracious 
Lady, I and my dear Kate thank your 
Princely Grace for the cheese. This present 
is the more dear to us, even though it were 
less, as your Serene Highness, by God's 
grace, showsTuch an earnest regard for his 
Holy Word. And we pray that the Father 
of all mercy, through his dear Son, may 
abundantly endow your Princely Grace with 
his Holy Spirit, and preserve you to the day 
of eternal redemption. We commend our- 
selves to your Princely Grace as willing 
servants. Amen. I send herewith to your 
Princely Grace plants of~mulberry and fig- 

H 



98 Luther's Letters to 'Women. 

trees, as many as I have at present. Besides 
these, I have nothing rare. 

Your Princely Grace's devoted, 

Maetinus Luther. 

Wednesday after Mgidi, 1538. 



To Ursula Schneidewin. 99 



LETTER XXXVII. 

To Ursula Schneidewin, at Stollberg. 
June 4, 1539. 

To the honourable, virtuous lady Ursula Schneide- 
win, widow, citizen at Stollberg, my kind, good 
friend. 

Grace and peace in Christ. Honourable, 
virtuous, dear Lady, I have written to you 
concerning your son John, that he has con- 
ceived a great love for an honourable maiden 
here ; and as you must have received my opi- 
nion, I hoped you might have given a favour- 
able answer ; but as the delay appears to me 
too long, I feel it necessary to urge you further. 
For I am not unfavourably disposed towards 
him, and would not that he should be driven 
to despair. As, therefore, the maiden so 
greatly pleases him, is not unequal to him in 
station, and is besides a gentle, good girl, of 
honourable extraction, it appears to me you 
may well be contented, as he has humbled 



100 Luther's Letters to Women. 

himself as a child, and begged for the maiden 
as did Samson. Therefore it is fitting for 
you, as a loving mother, to give your con- 
sent; for though we have written that chil- 
dren should not betroth themselves without 
the consent of their parents, we have also 
written, that parents should not, nor, accord- 
ing to God's will, can control or hinder their 
children at their own pleasure. No son 
should bring a daughter to his parents with- 
out their consent; but also a father should 
not force a wife upon his son. They should 
do their best on both sides, otherwise the 
son's wife must become the father's daughter 
without his approval. Who knows what 
happiness God may provide for your son by 
means of this maiden, which, perhaps, other- 
wise may be lost to him, especially as the 
good maiden gives fair hopes, is not unequal 
in station, and her sorrow might become a 
curse? In short, I beg you will no longer 
delay your assent, that the good fellow may 
be relieved from his disquiet. For I cannot 
delay longer ; but must take measures on ac- 
count of my office. But I beg you will not 



To Ursula Schneidewin. 101 

let this letter be known to your son John; 
for he ought not to know it till the matter is 
settled, that he may not be too confident and 
bold. For I love him, of -which he is well 
worthy, on account of his goodness, and there- 
fore would not advise him to his harm. There- 
fore do your part as a mother, and relieve him 
from this torment, that he may not be obliged 
to do it in spite of you. Herewith, God be 
with you. Amen. 

Maetinus Luther, De. 

Wednesday after Trinity, 1539. 



102 Luther's Letters to Women. 



LETTER XXXVIIL 

To the same. July 10, 1539. 

GrBACE to you, and peace in Christ. Hon- 
ourable and virtuous lady, I have, if I am 
not mistaken, written to you twice concern- 
ing your son John, who, as a good son, has 
begged you, through me, to show yourself a 
kind mother, as you ought, and give your 
consent to his marriage with this maiden, 
thereby doing his duty as a son, as Samson 
did to his parents. I have also told you that 
I can no longer delay, but think fit, as I pur- 
pose faithfully by him, that he should be de- 
livered from this danger ; for I see that his 
studies are hindered, and that no good can 
come if you are so harsh with him. What I 
do is for your honour : she is his equal, the 
child of good people. Besides, you must be- 
think you that it is not bearable that the 
children of other people should be excited to 
love, and afterwards, without cause, neglected. 



To Ursula Schneidewin. 103 

which you would hardly suffer to be done by 
your children ; therefore it must not be, es- 
pecially where it is a question of marriage. I 
have further written and advised that you 
should not refuse, that we may not be com- 
pelled to proceed notwithstanding. I have 
indeed written that children should not be- 
troth themselves without the consent of their 
parents; but I have also written, that pa- 
rents should not hinder their children ; and, 
in short, I cannot now repeat what I have 
written to you before, and I justly wonder 
that I have received no answer. It is so 
annoying to me that my boarder should de- 
lude our citizen's daughter, that I again beg 
you will give a speedy, favourable answer, 
otherwise we must do what we can to pre- 
vent scandal. You have been sufficiently en- 
treated: when parents will not decide, the 
pastor must. If you are anxious how he is 
to maintain himself, remember that one must 
put one's trust in God, who gives his support 
to the married state ; I will never, as long as 
I live, abandon John : nevertheless, he him- 
self will, God willing, prosper without my 



104 Luther's Letters to Women. 

help. I therefore beg you will show signs 
of life; for I am weary of writing so often 
on a matter in which you have no reason to 
object, otherwise I must suppose that you 
behave yourself thus to me on account of 
your son, which would be annoying to me, 
as I have always intended kindly by you and 
yours. Herewith, God be with you. Amen. 
And a short, right answer from you. 

Maetinus Luther, Dr. 

Thwrsdoey afier Kiliani, 1539. 



To the Duchess Katherine of Saxony. 105 



LETTER XXXIX. 

To- the Duchess Katherine of Saxony. 
July 28, 1539. 

A request concerning the management of the Church 
yisitatioQ in the dominions of Duke Henry, the hus- 
band of Katherine. 

To the serene, high-horn Princess and Lady, Kath- 
erine, horn Duchess of MecMenhurg, Duchess of 
Sadoony, Landgravine of Thuringia, and Mar- 
gravine of Meissen, my gracious lady. 

Grace and peace in Christ. Serene, high- 
born Princess, and gracious Lady ; as my 
gracious lord Duke Henry is old and weak, and 
the government new, difficult, and over-much 
for his Princely Grace ; and, indeed. Master 
Antonius^ alone, with those near him, cannot 
do all ; and as I hope your Princely Grace 
has less work, — my humble request is, that 
your Princely Grace would sometimes help 
to urge on matters, and desire that the visi- 
^ Antonius Lauterbach, pastor at Leipzig. 



106 Luther's Letters to Women. 

tation may proceed with proper dignity ; for 
there are certain bad people at Leipzig who 
constantly hope that it may be delayed, and 
finally fall to ashes. A little book also is 
about to be put forth against the visitors ; 
if that be so, we must answer it. Here might 
Y. P. Gr. help, that a flame may not burst 
out. They have, perhaps, their abettors, 
and need stern measures, that they may 
learn obedience ; otherwise, it would appear 
that they let one order what one will, and 
they do what they please. May Y. P. G. 
turn your mind with gracious diligence to 
honour the Word of God, and to guard 
against the devil ; this will be the most 
agreeable sacrifice and prayer to God the 
Father, to whose grace I commend Y. P. G. 
Amen. 

Your Princely Grace's obedient, 

Maetinus Luther. 

Monday after Jacobi, 1539. 



To Dorothea, Luther's Sister. 107 



LETTER XL. 

To Dorothea, the wife of B. Mackenrot, at 
Rossla, Luther^s Sister. December 2, 
1539. 

Aunouncement of his visit at Eossla ] but this letter 
is probably of an earlier period than would appear from 
its date. 

To he delivered to Frau Dorothea, the beloved Wife 
of Herr Balthazar Mackenrot, attendant on 
the Prince, at Rossla. 

Dear Sister, — t have seen, from the 
letter you sent me, how your deeply troubled 
conscience longs for the comfort of evangeli- 
cal preaching, and how you desire that you 
may some day hear it in your church at 
Rossla. I have greatly rejoiced thereat ; and 
have now resolved in God, if He grants me 
health and strength, to be with you certainly 
on the approaching holy Christmas Eve, and, 
by God's help, to begin the first evangelical 
preaching at Rossla and Upper Rossla, and 



108 Luther's Letters to Women. 

to perform it as a remembrance. Greet your 
husband and little daughter Margaret, to 
whom I will bring something; and Grod be 
with you. 

Maetinus Luthek, D. 

Grwen at EisUben, 
Dec. 2, 1539. 



To Elizabeth Duchess of Brwnswick. 109 



LETTER XLI. 

To the Duchess Elizabeth of Brunswick. 
January 29, 1540. 

Letter of reoommendation. 

To the most serene, high-born Princess and 
Lady, Frau Elizabeth, horn Margravine of 
Brandenburg, and Duchess of Brunswick and 
Lwneburg, my gracious lady. 

Geace and peace in Christ. Most serene, 
high-born Princess, gracious Lady, the bearer 
of this, Magister Justus Waldhausen, son of 
a citizen at Hamel, called to be Recorder 
there, has begged of me to write to your 
Princely Grace, as he has now for twelve 
years been accustomed to our Gospel, which, 
perhaps, is not in use at Hamel. May Y. P. G. 
please to be gracious to him, and protect him 
as much as possible ; and also request your 
princely husband to hold such-like persons in 
esteem. For, as Y. P. G. will perceive, he. is 
a learned, clever, pious man, such as one does 



110 Luther's Letters to Women. 

not often find. May Y. P. G. be graciously 
inclined to him : it ■will be for the advantage 
of the people and country, as he can and ■will 
be useful. By this, Y. P. Gr. also ■will do es- 
pecial service. Here^with, I commend you to 
the dear God. Amen. 

Your Princelj' Grace's obedient, 

Martinus Luthee. 

Thursday after the Conversion 
of St. Paul, 1540. 



To the Duchess Katherine of Saxony. Ill 



LETTER XLII. 

To the Duchess Katherine of Saxony. 
June 25, 1540. 

Luther again recommends to her the cause of the 
Beformation. 

I AGAIN pray of Y. P. G., with all sub- 
mission, that you will, as you gave me at 
Leipzig great hopes you would, earnestly and 
diligently help the churches and schools, that 
they may not be forgotten nor neglected. 
This is the highest service you can render to 
God. For I hear and see much that I should 
not have expected, and which truly displeases 
me ; not that my displeasure signifies much, 
unless it be displeasing to God Himself, and 
cannot come to a good end. God grant 
Y. P. G. courage, so to see and do (as God 
has given Y. P. G. power and opportunity to 
act), that the dear Gospel may be received in 
the principality, and continue there. 

For there are many and great secret 



112 Luther's Letters to Women. 

enemies among us, who boast themselves 
great lovers of the Word, and yet, in their 
hearts, hate those who deliver it ; which is 
a most pernicious and churlish trick, extin- 
guishing the dear Gospel by much and great 
extolling. May Y. P. G. accept this from 
me in good part, and graciously. For how 
can I desist 1 and how would it become me 
not to care for the dear Gospel, or to hear 
any thing to its detriment silently ? Herewith, 
I commend you to the dear God. Amen. 

Your Princely Grace's obedient, 

Maetinus Ltjthee. 

Friday after John the 
Baptist, 1540. 



To his Wife. 113 



LETTER XLIII. 

To his Wife. July 16, 1540. 

Written from Eisenach, where Luther was attend- 
ing a meeting. 

To my gracious Qirl, Katherine Luther von Bora 
and Zulsdorf, at Wittenberg, my darling. 

Grace and peace, my dear girl, and wife 
Kate. Your Grace must be informed that 
we all here are — God be praised ! — fresh and 
sound : we eat like behemoths (yet not 
much), and drink like Germans (yet not 
much), and are joyous. For our gracious 
Lord of Magdeburg, Bishop Amsdarf, is our 
messmate. We have no other news than that 
D. Caspar, Mecum,^ and Menius,^ have made 
an excursion from Hagenau^ to Strasburg, to 

> Mecum, or Frederic Myconius, first superintend- 
ent at Gotha. 

2 Justus Meniua, superintendent at Gotha ; died 
professor at Thomas College, at Leipzig. 

^ At Hagenau there was a religious conference. 

I 



114 Luther's Letters to Women. 

do honour and service to Hans von Jehnen.^ 
M. Philippus is well again,^ Grod be praised ! 
Tell my dear D. Schiefer^ that his King 
Ferdinand holds forth as though he would 
invite the Turks to be sponsors for the evan- 
gelical Princes.* I hope it is not true, for 
it would be too bad. Write to me again 
whether you have got all I sent you : that is, 
90 fl. by Wolf Paermann, &c. God be wdth 
you. Amen. Make the children pray. 
There is an indescribable and unbearable 
heat and sterility here, day and night. May 
the dear last day come soon. Amen. The 
Bishop of Magdeburg greets you kindly. 

Your darling, 

Martin Luther. 

Friday after Mwga/ret- 
day, 1540. 

1 Duke John of Saxony. 
^ Philippus was very ill on the journey. 
3 He had heen tutor of the Princes at Ferdinand's 
Court, and dismissed as an adherent of Luther. 
■* A facetious threat. 



To Ms Wife. 115 



LETTER XLIV. 
To the same. July 26, 1540. 

To the rich lady of Zvlsdorf Frau Doctor Kathe- 
rin^ Luther, dwelling in body at Wittenberg, 
and wandering in spirit to ZiUsdorf: to he 
delivered into the hands of my darling ; if 
absent, to be opened and read by D. Pomeran, 
Pastor. 

Peay arrange that we may find a good 
supply of beer with you ; for, God willing, 
we shall be at Wittenberg on Tuesday morn- 
ing. The Diet at Hagenau is all muck, lost 
trouble and labour, and useless expense ; yet, 
if we have done nothing more, we have 
fetched M. Philipp again from hell, and will 
bring him home again joyfully from the grave, 
God willing, and by his grace. Amen. The 
devil here is himself possessed with new bad 
devils, and burns and does frightful mischief 
More than a thousand acres of wood belong- 
ing to my gracious lord in the Thuringian 
wood have been burnt, and are burning. Be- 



1 1 6 Luther's Letters to Women. 

sides this, we have to-day news that the 
woods at Werda and in many more places are 
also destroyed ; there is no extinguishing them. 
That will make wood dear. Pray yourself, 
and cause others to do so, against the malig- 
nant Satan, who seeks vehemently not only 
our souls and bodies, but our property and 
honour. May Christ our Lord come from 
heaven, and blow up a spark for the devil 
and his associates that he cannot extinguish ! 
Amen. I am not certain whether this letter 
will find you at Wittenberg or at Ziilsdorf, 
else I would have written more. God be 
with you. Amen. Greet our children, board- 
ers, and all. 

Your dariing, 

M. LUTHEE, D. 
Monday after Jacobus, 1540. 



To his Wife. 117 



LETTER XLV. 
To the same. September 18, 1541. 

Katherine was probably at her property at Ziilsdorf. 

Grace and peace to you. Dear Kate, I 
send Urban to you with, this, that you may 
not be frightened if any alarm about the 
Turks should reach you. I wonder that you 
have not written or sent, as you well know 
that we are not without anxiety about you 
here, as Meinz, Heinz, and many of the nobles 
at Meissen, are very inimical to us. Dispose 
of and arrange what you can, and come home ; 
for it appears to me that it will rain mire, 
and God will visit our sins with the rod of 
his anger. God be with you. Amen. 

M. LUTHEE. 
SunAay after Larr^pertus, 1541. 



118 Luther's Letters to Women. 



XLVI. 

Luther's Will. January 6, 1542. 
It was confirmed by the Elector in 1566. 

I, Maetin Luthee, certify, in this my own 
handwriting, that I have given to my true 
and loving wife Katherine, as dowry (or 
whatever else one may call it), for her whole 
life, for her pleasure and advantage, and do 
give her by virtue of this letter at present 
and this day : 

First, the Uttle property of Zulsdorf, as I 
have bought and arranged it, and in all re- 
spects as I have hitherto had it. 

Secondly, the house of Bruno, for a dwell- 
ing, which I bought under the name of 
my " Wolf."! 

Thirdly, the goblets and ornaments, such 

1 Luther had bought it of Pastor Bruno, a peasant, 
under the name of his amanuensis, Wolfgang Sieberger. 



Luther's Will. 119 

as rings, chains and medals, gold and silver, 
value about 1000 fl. 

I do so for these reasons : 

First, because she has always loved and 
esteemed me as her pious, true, and lawful 
husband, to whom she has borne and reared, 
through God's abundant blessing, five living 
children ; and God grant they may long 
continue so. 

Secondly, that she may take upon her 
and pay any debts I have incurred (in case I 
should not be able to do so during my life), 
which may be, as far as I know, 450 fl., but 
may perhaps be found to be more. 

Thirdly and chiefly, that I desire the 
children^ to look to her for support, not she to 
the children ; and that they may hold her 

1 Luther's children were : 1. John, born June 7, 
1526 ; died at Kbnigsberg, October 28, 1572, Doctor 
of Law. 2. Elizabeth, born December 10, 1527 ; died 
August 3, 1528. 3. Magdalen, born May 4, 1529; 
died October 20, 1542. 4. Martin, born November 7, 
1531 ; died March 3, 1565, 5. Paulus, born January 
28, 1533 ; died March 8, 1593, physician. 6. Marga- 
ret, born December 16, 1534, wife of the Herr von 
Kunheim ; died 1670. 



120 Luther's Letters to Women. 

in honour, and be subject to her, as God has 
commanded. For I have truly seen and ex- 
perienced how the devil excites and provokes 
children against this lavr, even when they are 
good, through malicious and envious gabblers, 
especially when the mothers are widows, and 
the sons get wives, and the daughters hus- 
bands ; and again, socrus nurum, nurus 
socrum. For I consider that the mother 
will be the best guardian to her own chil- 
dren, and will make use of such dowry 
and property, not to the injury and detri- 
ment of the children, 'but for their use 
and advantage ; for they are her own flesh 
and blood, and she has borne them under 
her heart. 

And though she should be necessitated or 
find reason (for I can place no limit to the 
works and will of God) to change her state, 
yet I trust and have perfect confidence that 
she will demean herself as a mother to all 
her children, and divide all faithfully, be it 
dowry or aught else, as is right. 

And I herewith submissively beg of the 
high and mighty lord, Duke John Frederic, 



Luther's Will. 121 



Elector, &c., that H. P. G. will maintain and 
protect all such gifts or dowries. 

I also beg of all my good friends that 
they will be witnesses for my dear Kate, and 
help to exculpate her if gossiping tongues 
should molest or calumniate her, as though 
she kept back certain ready money which she 
would embezzle or purloin from the poor 
children. I bear witness that there is no 
ready money, but only the goblets and jewels 
mentioned above in the dowry. And, indeed, 
the reckoning may be publicly made by 
every one, because it is known how much 
income I have received from my high and 
mi'ghty lord, and beyond that, not a penny ; 
nor have we received a mite from any one, 
except such presents as are mentioned above 
among the jewels, or the portion which is put 
down as debt. And that, with such an in- 
come and presents, I should have been able 
to aflFord to build and buy so much, and main- 
tain so large and heavy a household expendi- 
ture, I consider as a special and wonderful 
blessing, and that it is no wonder that I have 
left no ready money, but rather debts. This 



122 Luther's Letters to Women. 

therefore I beg ; for the devil, though he could 
not come nigh to me, might in all ways seek 
after my Kate, if only for the reason that she 
has been the wedded wife of the man D. M., 
and, God be praised, is so still. 

Lastly, I beg of every one, as in this gift 
or dowry I have not used legal forms or 
words (for which I have had reasons), to 
allow me to be the person, which in truth I 
am, known both in heaven and earth, and 
also in hell, of sufficient consideration and 
authority to be trusted more than any notary. 
For if God, the Father of all mercy, has in- 
trusted to me, a poor, unworthy, miserable 
sinner, the Gospel of his dear Son, and has 
likewise made me faithful, and true therein, 
and has hitherto found and kept me thus, — so 
that many have accepted the same through 
me, and consider me a teacher of truth, in 
spite of the Pope's law, and the wrath of the 
emperor, kings, princes, priests, nay, of all 
devils, — shall I not much more be believed in 
this so small a matter, especially as here is my 
handwriting, so well known ; therefore I hope 
it will be sufficient when it can be shown and 



Luther's Will. 123 



said, This is the earnest and well-considered 
intention of D. M. L. (God's notary, and wit- 
ness of his Gospel), done by his own hand 

and seal. 

M. L. 

Witnessed by Melancthon, Cruciger, and 
Bugenhagen. 

Done cmd gi/oen on the day of 
Epiphany, 15i2. 



124 Luther's Letters to Women. 



LETTER XLVII. 

To the Widow of J. Gellarius} 
May 8, 1542. 

Letter of consolation. 

Grace to you, and peace in Christ, hon- 
ourable, virtuous, and dear lady. I have 
■with sorrow learnt how Grod the dear Father 
has .chastised you and us also with his rod, in 
taking away from you and us the dear man 
Johann Cellarius, your husband, which is a 
grief to us all, though he is in happy, blissful 
rest. But be comforted by this, — that your 
sorrow is not the greatest experienced by the 
children of men ; there are many who suffer 
and endure a hundred times more. And if aU 
our sufferings on earth were piled up in a heap, 
they would be as nothing compared with 
what the guiltless Son of God has suffered 
for us and our salvation; for no death can 

' Professor of Hebrew at Leipzig. 



To the Widow of J. Gellarius. 125 

be compared with the death of our Lord and 
Saviour Christ, through whose death we are 
all saved from eternal death. 

Be therefore comforted in the Lord, who 
has died for you and all, and is vrorth more 
than we men, women, and children, and all 
are ; for we are his, whether we die or live, are 
rich or poor, or however it may be. And if 
we are his, He also is ours, with all that He 
is and has. Amen. I commend you to his 
grace. My Kate sends you comfort in Grod. 

Monday after Gantate, 1542. 



126 Luther's Letters to Women. 



LETTER XL VIII. 
To one unknown. January 11, 1543. 

To give peace of conscience. 

Geacb and peace in the Lord. My dear 
Frau Margarita, your brother Johannes has 
informed me how your heart is troubled by 
the Evil Spirit, whereby you have uttered 
such wicked words. I would that the devil 
would fetch away all those who have so ad- 
vised you, that thus he may torment and 
prompt you, as if you were to remain eter- 
nally his. 

Ah, dear Margarita, as you feel and con- 
fess that it is the Evil Spirit who has dragged 
such words from you, and that it is his wicked 
suggestion, be assured that all he suggests 
are lies ; as " he is a liar, and the father of 
lies" (John viii. 44). For assuredly it is not 
suggested by Christ that you should belong 
to the devil, seeing that He has died that 
those who are under the power of the devil 



To one unknown. 127 

may be released from him. Therefore do 
thus to the devil : spit at him, and say, " Have 
I sinned ? Alas ! I have sinned, and it grieves 
me; but I will not despair; for Christ has 
borne and taken away all my sins — nay, those 
of the whole world, if they only confess their 
sins, amend, and beheve in Christ, who com- 
manded ' that repentance and remission of 
sins should be preached in his name among 
all nations' (Lukexxiv. 4). And what should 
I do if I had committed murder, adultery — 
nay, had crucified Christ Himself? yet would 
it be forgiven, according to his prayer upon 
the cross — 'Father, forgive them.' This I 
am bound to believe, and am also absolved ; 
therefore, avaunt thee, devil ! for ever 
away !" 

Thus shall you, dear Margarita, not be- 
lieve in the devil nor your own thoughts ; but 
in us preachers, whom God has commanded 
to instruct souls, comfort and absolve them, 
as He says (Matt. xvi. 19; John xx. 23): 
"Whosesoever sins ye remit, they shall be 
remitted." This you should believe, and not 
doubt. Now we preachers absolve and free 



128 Luther's Letters to Women. 

you, in Christ's name and by his command, 
not only from this one sin, but from all the 
sins born in you from Adam ; which- are so 
many and great, that God in his goodness 
will not let us see them all and entirely, nor 
feel them thoroughly (for we could not bear 
it), still less reckon them against us, if we 
believe in Him. 

Therefore be content and comforted; your 
sins are forgiven you. Rest boldly on this ; 
do not turn again to your thoughts, but listen 
only to what your pastor and preacher tell 
you from God's Word; do not despise their 
word and comfort, — for it is Christ Himself 
who speaks to you through them ; as He says, 
"He that heareth you heareth Me" (Luke 
X. 16). Believe this, and the devil will away, 
and leave you. But if you are still weak in 
faith, say thus : " I would willingly be firmer 
in my faith, and I know well that these things 
are true and to be beheved. Though now I 
am not sufficiently firm in faith, yet I know 
that it is the pure truth." That is called 
" believing unto righteousness" and salvation ; 
as Christ says (Matt. v. 6): "Blessed are 



To one unhnown. 129 

they who hunger and thirst after righteous- 
ness." 

Christ our dear Lord, who was deUvered 
for our offences, and was raised again for 
our justification (Rom. iv. 25), comfort and 
strengthen your heart in true faith ; and be 
not troubled concerning your sins. 

D. Maktinus Luthee. 

Thursday after Epiphany, 1543. 



130 Luther's Letters to Women. 



LETTER XLIX. 

To the Electress Elizabeth of Brandenburg. 

October 22, 1543. 

Concerning a preacher's appointment. 

To the most Serene and High-horn Princess and 
Lady, Frau Elizabeth, horn of the royal race of 
Denmark, Electress of Brandenburg, Duchess 
of Stettin, Pomerania, Wittwen, &c., my most 
gracious lady and dear godmother. 

Geace and peace in the Lord. Most serene 
and high-born Princess, most gracious Lady, 
&c. ; according to the desire of Y. E. P. G., 
I will diligently urge upon the Visitors that 
they shall place another preacher at Prettin, 
in the room of Johann Fabri, ■whom Y. E. P. G. 
has called to be court preacher, if the Pastor 
Severin retires. I heard yesterday that he 
refuses to go to Pelgern. But that will soon 
be known. Herewith, God be with you. 
Amen. 
Your Electoral Princely Grace's obedient, 
Maetinus Lutheb, D. 

Monday after Lucii, 1543. 



To the Eledress of Brandenburg. 131 



LETTER L. 
To the same. February 10, 1544. 

Thanks for the fulfilment of a request. 

To the most Serene, High-horn Princess and Lady, 
Fran Elizabeth, horn, of the royal race of Den- 
mark, Margravine of Brandenburg, Electress 
of Wittwen, my gracious lady and godmother, 

Gkace and peace. Most serene, high-born 
Princess, most gracious Lady, and dear God- 
mother ; I have learnt with hearty gladness, 
from Y. E. P. G.'s letter, that you will quite 
willingly — nay, even graciously — permit Herr 
Johann Faber to be pastor in the town of 
Prettin. Y. E. P. G. will thus have done 
a good work ; for, as he has been known 
there before, and will be thankfully wel- 
comed, I hope much fruit may be pro- 
duced, and God give it his blessing. I am 
bound and willing to serve Y. E. P. G. 



132 Luther's Letters to Women. 

The dear God and Father of our Lord and 
Saviour Jesus Christ be with your Electoral 
Princely Grace always. Amen. 

Maetinus Lutheb. 

Simday after Dorothea, 1544. 



To the Electress Sibylla of Saxony. 133 



LETTER LI. 

To the Electress Sibylla of Saxony. 
March 30, 1544. 

A letter of thanks and consolation. 

To the most Serene, High-horn Princess and Lady, 
Frau Sibylla, born Duchess of Jules and Cleves, 
t&c, Duchess of Saxony, Electress, Landgravine 
of Thuringia, Margravine of Meissen, and 
Burgravine of Magdeburg, my gracious lady. 

Grace and peace in the Lord. Most 
serene, high-born Princess, I thank Y. E. P. G. 
quite humbly that you have so anxiously and 
constantly inquired after my health, and how 
it fares with my wife and children, wishing 
me also all happiness. It fares well with us, 
God be praised, and better than we deserve 
in the sight of God. That my head, however, 
is not sometimes very strong is no wonder. Old 
age is there, which in itself is old and cold, 
ill-fashioned, sick, and weak. The pitcher 
continues to go for water, till at last it breaks. 



134 Luther's Letters to Women. 

I have lived long enough. God grant me a 
happy closing hour, wherein this corrupt, vile 
body shall go under the earth to its kindred, 
and become the portion of worms. I consider 
also that I have seen the best that I can see 
on earth; for it seems as if things would 
become worse. God help his own ! Amen. 
When Y. E. P. G. tells me how wearisome it 
is to you that our gracious Lord, Y. E. P. G.'s 
husband, should be absent, I can well believe 
it; but as it is needful, and such absence is 
for the advantage and good of the German 
nation and Christendom, we must bear it with 
patience, according to God's will.^ If the 
devil could keep quiet, we should have more 
peace, and less to do, and not suffer so much 
annoyance. But we have the advantage of 
possessing the dear Word of God, which com- 
forts and supports us in this life, and pro- 
mises and brings us to the future life of bliss. 
We have also prayer, which we know (as 
Y. E. P. G. writes) is pleasing to God, and 
will be heard by Him in his good time. These 
two unspeakable treasures neither the devil, 

1 The Elector was at the Diet of Spires. 



To the Electress Sibylla of Saxony. 135 

nor the Turk, nor the Pope, nor any of his, 
can have, and are therefore far poorer and 
more miserable than any beggar on earth. 
We may assuredly boast and comfort our- 
selves, and thank God, the Father of all mercy, 
in Christ Jesus his dear Son our Lord, that 
He has granted us such a dear and holy 
treasure, and appointed for us unworthy, such 
a jewel, through his abundant grace ; that we 
therefore should not only willingly and gladly 
see and suffer the evils of this world, but 
also have compassion on the blind, miserable 
world, and especially on its great leaders, 
that they are deprived of such grace, and not 
yet found worthy of it. May God in time 
enlighten them, that they also may, with us, 
see, discern, and comprehend it ! Amen. 
My Kate begs to offer her poor prayers for 
Y. E. P . G., and in all humility thanks Y. E. P. G. 
for so graciously thinking of her. Herewith, 
God be with you. Amen. 

Your Electoral Princely Grace's humble, 
Maet. Luthee, D. 

Jvdica, 1544. 



136 Luther's Letters to Women. 



LETTER LII. 

To the same. April 28, 1544. 

To the most Serene, High-horn Princess and Lady, 
the Frau Sibylla, bom Duchess ofJulich, &c.. 
Duchess of Saxony, Electress, Landgravine of 
Thuringia, Margravine of Meissen, and Bur- 
gravine of Magdeburg, my gracious lady. 

Grace and peace, and my poor Pr. Nr. Most 
serene, high-born Princess and gracious Lady, 
Dr. Augustin has addressed me on behalf of 
Y. E. P. G., about the answer that I was to 
write to Y. E. P. G.'s letter. But I hope 
that my answer has meanwhile come to 
Dr. Augustin, with Y. E. P. G. ; for I sent it 
by Captain Asmus Spiegel,^ because I had 
not, and knew not, of any other messenger. 
If it so happens that they should not have 
come to Y. E. P. G., I will wilhngly answer 
again. For I hare heartily thanked, and 
do still thank, Y. E. P. G. for your gracious 
letter and favour. 

^ Erasmus Spiegel, Captain at Wittenterg. 



To the Electress Sibylla of Saxony. 137 

We hope and pray that God will send 
home our dear sovereign and most gracious 
lord speedily and joyfully. Amen. There is 
not much to be done now with the Papists, 
without their consuming us with expenses, 
and emptying our purses, although they 
pretend that they are willing, and yet are 
not. May our Lord Jesus, whose work it is, 
and who has begun it, bring it Himself to an 
end, as He will do, and has hitherto done ; 
otherwise it will remain undone, and nothing 
good will come of it. To Him, in his mercy, 
I commend Y. E. P. G., together with the 
dear ladies, &c. Amen. 

Your Electoral Princely Grace's humble, 

M. EUTHEE, D. 
Monday, Yitalis, 1544. 



138 Luther's Letters to Women. 



LETTER LIII. 

To the Wife of Jerome Baumgdrtner} at 
Nuremberg. July 8, 1544. 

Letter of consolation. 

Grace to you, and peace in our dear 
Saviour and Lord Jesus Christ. Honourable, 
virtuous, and dear lady, God, who sees and 
hears my sighs, knows how heartfelt is my 
sorrow for your grief and misfortune ; in- 
deed, every one is heartily grieved for the 
dear man who has so sadly fallen into the 
hands of the enemy. May God hear our 
prayer, and that of all pious hearts ! For it 
is certain that all pious hearts pray earnestly 
for him ; and assuredly such prayers will be 
acceptable and agreeable to God. 

Meanwhile, we must comfort ourselves 
with the divine promises, that He will not 

1 Jerome Baumgartner, a senator of Nuremberg, 
had been taken prisoner by one of tbe Franconian 
Knights, Von Kosenberg. 



To the Wife of Jerome Baumgartner. 139 

abandon or forget those who are his, with 
which the Psalter abounds ; for we know 
that your lord is an upright man in the faith 
of Christ, which he has worthily confessed, 
and adorned by many line fruits. Therefore 
it is impossible that He should have cast him 
off; but, as He has called him through his 
Holy Word to Himself, and received him into 
his gracious bosom. He will keep him ever- 
more in that bosom, and will daily support 
him. It is the same God who has, before 
this misfortune, kept him as his dear Chris- 
tian and child of life. He will remain the 
same God to him, though He may appear 
otherwise for a short time, in order to try 
our faith and patience a little. He has said 
(in John xvi. 20, 22) : " Ye shall be sorrow- 
ful ; but your sorrow shall be turned into 
joy, which no man taketh from you." This 
his promise He will keep without fail. 

Besides, our sufferings are not so great 
and bitter as were those of his dear Son, and 
his dear mother, which should comfort and 
strengthen us in our sorrows ; as St. Peter 
teaches us (iPet.iii. 18) : "ForChrist also hath 



140 Luther's Letters to Women, 

once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust." 
The devil and his rejoice in our misfortunes, 
but shall bitterly enough lament that they 
have so done ; and their short joy shall 
become a long mourning. But vy^e have the 
glorious and great advantage, that God is 
merciful and gracious to us, with all angels 
and creatures ; therefore, no misfortunes of 
this body can injure the soul, but rather are 
useful to us; as St. Paul says (Rom. viii. 28) : 
" We know that all things work together for 
good to them that love God." In respect to 
the body, we suffer woe, and shall and must 
do so ; for we should not be true Christians 
did we not suffer with Christ, and had not 
sympathy with sufferers. 

Therefore, my dear lady, suffer and be 
patient ; for you do not suffer alone, but 
have many, many excellent, faithful, pious 
hearts, who have great sympathy with you, 
who all do according to the saying (Matt. 
XXV. 36) : " I was in prison, and ye came 
unto Me." Yea, truly, in great crowds we 
visit the dear Baumgartner in his prison, 
that is, the Lord Christ Himself, imprisoned 



To the Wife of Jerome Baumgartner. 141 

in the person of a true member ; and we 
pray and call upon Him to liberate him, and 
thus gladden the hearts of you and all of us. 
May the same Lord Jesus, who calls upon 
us to comfort one another, and comforts us 
by his Holy Word, comfort and strengthen 
your heart by his Spirit, in steadfast patience, 
until the happy end of this and all misfor- 
tunes. To whom, together with the Father 
and Holy Spirit, be honour and praise for 
ever. Atnen. 

Maktintts Luthee, D. 

TiKsday after the Visitation 
of Mary, 1544. 



142 Luthet's Letters to Women. 



LETTER LI 7. 

To Frau Jorger. July 13, 1544. 

Account of her Nephews. 

Grace to you, and peace in the Lord. 
Honourable and virtuous lady, we have 
received your dear nephews and children, 
and hope that they will be honourably and 
well taken care of by the pious Magister 
George Meyer. God grant them grace, that 
they may study well, and become pious, as 
I have good hope in them. For in these bad 
times it is needful that there should be many 
pious people, who will help us, by their good 
lives and prayers, to expiate our former and 
daily increasing sins, and to turn away the 
chastisement which is ready to fall on our 
heads. For the former idolatry of the Papacy 
(which they will not yet give up), and our 
ingratitude, press heavily upon us. May the 
merciful God follow after us with his Holy 



To Frau Jorger. 143 

Spirit, and graciously perfect the good work 
He has begun in us through his Holj Word ! 
Amen. To whose grace I commend you ; and 
pray for a blessed, short end for me, for it 
is well nigh the time for my journey home, 
and rest. 

D. Maetinus Luther. 

Datum die MargareihoB, 
1544. 



144 Luther^ s Letters to Women. 



LETTER LV. 

To the same. September 5, 1544. 

Letter of consolation. 

To the honourable and virtuous Lady, Dorothea 
Jorger, widow, at Kappach, my well-wisher 
and friend. 

Grace and peace in the Lord. Honour- 
able, virtuous, and dear lady, with respect to 
your nephews, I expect that their preceptor, 
M. George Meyer, will have written to you 
all the circumstances. I can well believe 
that you are grieved at the disunion of your 
sons ; and I am truly sorry, both for their 
discord and your trouble. Now, what is to 
be done 1 There must be misfortunes and 
crosses in this life ; by these God drives us 
to his Word and prayer, that He may hear 
and comfort us. Therefore, do not desist 
from admonishing them, by God's Word, to 
brotherly love ; and likewise earnestly pray, 
that God may prosper and further with his 



To Frau Jorger. 145 

grace such admonitions, as He has com- 
manded us to pray and to trust in Him : 
" Ask, and it shall be given you ; seek, and 
you shall find ; knock, and it shall be opened 
to you." I would have written to them now ; 
but, as they might suspect that I had been 
informed by you, I will refrain till I can say, 
" I have learnt it from others ;" and then I 
,will represent, as sharply as I can, what a 
bad example they set; and Grod grant his 
blessing. Amen. My Kate and children 
thank you kindly for your greeting and 
good -will. Herewith, God be with you. 
Amen. 

Maetinus Luthee. 

September 5, 1544. 



14.6 Luther's Letters to Women. 



LETTER LVI. 

To the Widow of George Schuken. 
October 8, 1544. 

Letter of consolation. 

GrBACE to you, and peace in tlie Lord. 
Honourable and virtuous Frau Heva, and 
good friend, I am grieved at your misfor- 
tune, God having taken your dear husband 
from you. I can well believe the pain of 
such a parting ; it would not be well if it did 
not give you pain, for it would be a sign of 
cold love. 

But, on the other hand, you may have 
great comfort: First, because his departure 
hence was Christian and blessed. Secondly, 
because the will of God, our dear Father, 
is altogether best : who gave his Son for 
us. How fitting, then, is it that we should 
sacrifice our will to his, for his service and 
pleasure, which is not only our duty, but 
from which we have much fruit and joy ! 



To the Widow of George Schulzen. 147 

But may He, our dear Lord Jesus Christ, 
comfort you abundantly by his Spirit ! 
Amen. Herewith, I commend you to the 
dear God. 

Wechiesday after Franciscus, 1544. 



148 Luther's Letters to Women. 



LETTER LVII. 

To an Aged Couple. October 25, 1544. 

On the death of their son. 

Grace to you, and peace in Christ, our 
Lord and Saviour. Honourable, dear, good 
friends, tlie preceptor of your dear son of 
blessed memory has begged me to write this 
letter, and advise you in the misfortune which, 
as parents, you have experienced in the death 
of your son. And truly it is not to be be- 
lieved that you should not be sorry ; it would 
indeed not be a nice thing to hear that father 
and mother were not grieved at the death of 
their son. So says also the wise man, Jesus 
Sirach, chap. xxii. 10, 11 : " Thou shalt mourn 
over the desad, for his light is extinguished ; 
yet shall you not mourn much, for he is gone 
to his rest." 

And thus you, when you have sorrowed 
and wept moderately, shall comfort yourselves 
again, — nay, thank God with joy that your 



To cm Aged Couple. 149 

son has made such a good end, and has gone 
to sleep so softly in Christ, that there can be 
no doubt that he must be sleeping sweetly 
and softly in the eternal rest of Christ. For 
every one is amazed at this great mercy, that 
he has continued steadfast to the end in prayers 
and confession of Christ, which grace should 
be more acceptable to you than if he had 
flourished a thousand years in all this world's 
good things and honours. He has taken with 
him the greatest treasure he could attain to 
in this life. 

Therefore be comforted ; he is well off in 
comparison of many thousands who perish 
miserably — nay; sometimes dishonourably — 
and die in their sins. Therefore it were 
heartily to be desired that you and all yours, 
together with all of us, should, through God's 
grace, so depart. He has conquered the world 
and the devil, whilst we are still daily liable 
to be overcome, and must be exposed to all 
the dangers against which he is now secure. 
You sent him to the right school, and appUed 
well your love and care. God help us also 
hereafter. Amen. 



150 Luther's Letters to Women. 

May the Lord and most high Comforter 
Jesus Christ — who has loved your son better 
than yourself, having first called him through 
his Word, and afterwards summoned him to 
Himself, and taken him from you — comfort 
and strengthen you with his grace, till the 
day when you will see your son again in 
eternal joy ! Amen. 

Maetinus Luthbe, D. 

Salm/rday after St. Lucas, 1544. 



To his Wife. 151 



LETTER LVIII. 
To his Wife. July 1545. 

Written from Leipzig, where Luther had gone with 
his sons, from dissatisfaction at the prevailing corrup- 
tion of morals at Wittenberg. 

Geacb and peace to you. Hans will tell 
you every thing concerning our journey. I 
am, however, not yet certain whether he 
shall remain with me ; but D. Caspar Cruci- 
ger and Ferdinand will tell you. Ernst von 
Schonfeld entertained us well at Lobnitz, and 
Heinz Scherle still better at Leipzig.^ I 
would gladly arrange so that I need not re- 
turn to Wittenberg. My heart is chilled, so 
that I would not willingly stay there ; and I 
wish that you would sell the garden and land, 
house and farm ; then I will give back the 
large house to M. G. H. And it would be 
best for you to estabUsh yourself at Ziilsdorf, 
whilst I am still alive, and can help you with 

1 A merchant in Leipzig. 



152 Luther's Letters to Women. 

my salary to improve the property ; for I 
hope that M. G-. H. will continue to me the 
salary, — at least to the last year of my life. 
After my death you will not be able to bear 
the four elements at Wittenberg ; therefore it 
would be better to do what has to be done 
during my life. Perhaps Wittenberg, with 
its government, as it would seem, will get not 
St. Vitus's nor St. John's dance, but the beg- 
gars' or Beelzebub's, as they have begun : and 
there is no one there to control or punish ; 
and God's Word will be derided. Away, then, 
from this Sodom ! I have heard more in the 
country than I learnt in Wittenberg ; there- 
fore I am weary of the city, and will not, so 
God help me, return there. The day after 
to-morrow I travel to Merseburg, Prince 
George having much begged of me to do so. 
I will stroll about and eat beggar's bread 
rather than torment and disturb my poor last 
days with the disorderly life at Wittenberg, 
and witness the loss of all my hard, precious 
work. You may, if you like, let Dr. Pommer 
and Mag. Philippus know this ; and perhaps 
Dr. Pommer will give my good-by to Witten- 



To his Wife. 153 



berg, for I am bursting with anger and dis- 
gust. Herewith, God be with you. Amen. 

Maetinus Luthee. 



Tuesday after Whitsuntide, 1545. 



154 Luther's Letters to Women. 



LETTER LIX. 
To the same. January 25, 1546. 

Luther is on a journey to Eisleben, to arrange the 
disputes betwixt the Counts of Mansfeld. 

To he delivered to my dear Kate Luther, 
at Wittenberg. 

Geace and peace in the Lord. Dear 
Kate, we arrived to-day, about eight o'clock, 
at Halle, but did not go on to Eisleben ; for 
a great Anabaptist met us, with billows of 
water and blocks of ice, which covered the 
country, and threatened to baptise us again. 
Nor could we return, on account of the Mulda ; 
so we are obliged to remain quietly at Halle, 
betwixt the two waters, — not that we thirst 
for it to drink, but refresh and comfort our- 
selves with good Torgau beer and Rhine wine, 
until the Saal have ceased raging. For, as 
the servants, ferrymen, and we ourselves were 
alarmed, we would not trust ourselves to the 
water, and tempt God, as the devil is furi- 



To his Wife. 155 



ous with us, and dwells in the water-floods ; 
and prevention is better than cure ; nor is it 
necessary to make ourselves a laughing-stock 
to the Pope and his fellows. I should not 
have thought that the Saal could have made 
such a bubbling, and burst in this way over 
the causeway and all. 

No more now ; but pray for us, and be 
pious. I hold that, had you been here, you 
would have advised us to do the same ; and 
thus we should for once have followed your 
advice. Herewith, Grod be with you. Amen. 

MAETmUS LlJTHEE, D. 



At Halle, on the day of 
the Cotwersion of St. Paul, 1546. 



156 Luther's Letters to Women. 



LETTER LX. 

To the same. Fehrua/ry 1, 1546. 

Written from Eisleben. 

To my heartily beloved wife Katherine Luther, 
Zulsdorfian Doctoress,^ swine-marketian, and 
whatever else she may he. 

GrEACE and peace in Christ, and my old 
poor love, as before. Dear Kate, I became 
very weak on the road before reaching Eisle- 
ben, for my sins. But if you had been there, 
you would have said it was for the sins of the 
Jews ; for we had to pass through a village 
a little way from Eisleben where many Jews 
dwell, and perhaps they have blown cold 
upon me. There are now here in the city 
of Eisleben above fifty Jews residing ; and it 
is true that when I passed through the vil- 
lage, such a cold wind came from behind the 
carriage on to my head through my cap, as 

' Evidently an expression of contempt for Witten- 
berg. 



To Us Wife. 157 



though it would turn my brain to ice. This 
may have helped to cause my dizziness ; but 
I am now, thank God, stronger. 

When the main business is settled, I will 
take steps to drive away the Jews. Count 
Albrecht hates and no longer protects them ; 
but no one yet does aught against them. 
Please God, I will help Count Albrecht in the 
pulpit, and leave them to their fate likewise. 

Your sons left Mansfeld yesterday, as 
Hans von Jene had so humbly prayed they 
would. I know not what they are doing 
there. If it were cold, they might help me 
to shiver here ; but now it is warm, they may 
do or suiFer what else pleases them. Here- 
with, God be with you, and all the household ; 
and greet all our friends. 

M. L., TOUE OLD Darling. 



Vigilia Purificdtionis, 1546. 



158 Luther's Letters to Women. 



LETTER LXI. 

To the same. February 6, 1546. 

From the same place. 

To the deeply-learned lady Katherine Luther, my 
gracious wife, at Wittenberg. 

Grace and peace. Dear Kate, we sit 
here, and let ourselves be tormented, and 
would gladly be away ; but that cannot be, 
I think, for a week. Tell Magister Philipp 
that he may correct his exposition; for he 
has not understood why the Lord in the 
Gospel calls riches thorns. Here is the school 
where one may learn to understand it.^ But 
it dawns on me why, in the Holy Scriptures, 
the thorns are always threatened with fire ; 
therefore I wait with greater patience, that, 
by God's help, I may bring matters to a good 
end. Your sons are stiU at Mansfeld. I 
have plenty to eat and driij^ and might have 

' Luther alludes here to the disputes he had to settle. 



To his Wife. 159 



pleasant days, if this vexatious quarrel were 
settled. It appe9J8_^to me that the devil 
scoflFs at us; but. God will laugh him to 
scorn. Amen. Pray for us. The messenger 
is in great haste. 

Maetintjs Luthee, D. 



On St. Dorothy' B-day, 1546. 



160 Luther's Letters to Women. 



LETTER LXII. 

To the same. February 7, 1546. 

From the same place. 

To my dear wife Katherine Luther, doctoress and 
self-tormentor, at Wittenberg ; to the hands and 
feet of my gracious lady. 

Grace and peace in the Lord. Read , 
d ear K ate, St. John and the small catechism, 
of which you sometimes say, all in this book 
is said of me. For yo u mus t needs take 
God's cares on you, just as if He were not 
Almighty^ who could create ten Doctor Mar- 
tinus's, if the one old one were drowned in 
the Saal, or at Ofenlqch, or at Wolf's Yogel- 
heerd.-' Leave me in peace with your cares ; 
I have a better guardian than you and all the 
angels — He who lay in a manger, and hung 
on a virgiiTs breast, but now sits at the right 

1 Probably allusions to particular places. 



To Us Wife. 161 



hand of the Almighty Father. Therefore be 
in peace. Amen. 

I think that hell and the whole world 
must be empty of all their devils, who perhaps 
have all met together on my account at Eisle- 
ben, so stiff and stubborn is the state of affairs. 
There are Jews here, near fifty in a house, as 
I have before^itten to you. They say that 
at Rissdorf, near Eisleben, the place where I 
was ill on my journey hither, nigh four hun- 
dred Jews pass in and out. Count Albrecht, 
to whom all the frontier round Eisleben be- 
longs, has withdrawn his protection from any 
Jews who may be seized on his property ; yet 
no one will as yet do any thing to them. 
The Countess of Mansfeld, widow of Solms, 
is considered the protector of the Jews. I 
know not whether it is true ; but I have made 
it strongly enough apparent to-day, if one 
chooses to understand it, what my opinion is, 
if it is of any use. Pray, pray, pray, and help 
us, that we may do it well. For to-day J 
had a mind to give full vent to my wrath, 
but was restrained when the wretchedness of 
my fatherland occurred to me. I have be- 

M 



162 Luther's Letters to Women. 

come a lawyer also now ; but it will not an- 
swer to them. They had better have let me 
remain a theologian. If I were to come 
among them, if I should live, I might become 
an ogre, who would, by God's grace, check 
their pride. They give themselves airs, as 
though they were God, from which they had 
better desist in time, before their godhead 
becomes devildom, as happened to Lucifer, 
who could not remain in heaven on account 
of his pride. ■ "Well, God's will be done. Let 
M. Philipp read this letter; for I have not 
time to write to him. We live well here, and 
the Councillor sends me every day, at meal- 
time, a half-stoup of Rheinfall, which is ver^'^ 
good. I sometimes drink it with my friends. 
The wine of the country also is very good 
here, as is likewise the Naumburg beer, ex- 
cept that it seems to make me very phlegmatic 
with its pitch. The devil has spoilt the beer 
all over the world with his pitch, and the 
v^ine about you with brimstone. But here 
there is pure wine, excepting that of the 
country. Know that all the letters you have 
written have come here, and to-day the one 



To his Wife. 163 



which you wrote last Friday, with M. PhiUpp's 
letter. I mention this, that you may not be 
angry. 

Your dear lord, 

M. Luther. 

The Sunday after St. Dorothy'' s-day, 1546. 



164 Luther's Letters to Women. 



LETTER LXIII. 

To the same. February 10, 1546. 

From the same place. 

To the saintly, anxious-minded lady Katherine 
Luther, Dwtoress and Zulesdorferin, at Witten- 
berg, my gracious and dear wife, 

Grace and peace in Christ. Most saintly- 
Lady Doctoress, we thank you kindly for 
your great anxiety, which has hindered you 
from sleeping; for since the time that you 
have had this care for us, a fire in our 
inn, close to my chamber-door, has well-nigh 
consumed us ; and yesterday (without doubt 
through the power of your care) a stone al- 
most fell on our heads, and crushed us, as in 
a mouse-trap. For in our private chamber, 
during two days, lime and mortar rattled 
over our heads, till we sent for workmen, 
who, touching the stone — which was the size 
of a large pillow, and two hands' -breadth 
wide — with two fingers, it fell down. For this 



To Us Wife. 165 



we should have had to thank your saintly 
care, if the dear holy angels had not guarded 
us. I am anxious lest, if you do not cease to 
be so anxious, the earth may at last swallow 
us up, and all the elements persecute us. Do 
you thus teach the catechism and belief? 
Pray, and leave it to God to care, as is pro- 
mised : " Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and 
He shall sustain thee" (Ps. Iv., and in many 
other places). 

We are now, thank God, fresh and sound, 
except that the state of affairs gives us annoy- 
ance ; and Dr. Jonas is pleased to have a bad 
leg, having accidentally knocked himself 
against a chest : such great envy is there in 
people, that he would not permit me to have 
a bad leg alone. Herewith, God be with 
you. We would now willingly be free and 
journey home, God willing. Amen, Amen, 
Amen. 

Your Holiness's devoted servant, 

Martinits Luther. 



On Scholastica's-day, 1546. 



166 Luther's Letters to Women. 



LETTER LXIV. 

To the same. February 14, 1546. 

Last Letteb. 

To my hind, dear wife Katherine Luther von Bora, 
at Wittenberg. 

Grace and peace in the Lord. Dear 
Kate, we hope, G-od willing, to return home 
this week. God has shown us great grace 
here ; for the lords have arranged almost all 
through their councillors, except two or three 
article's, among which is, that the two bro- 
thers Count Gebhard and Count Albrecht 
shall become brothers again, which I take in 
hand to-day, and will invite them to be my 
guests, that they may speak to one another ; 
for hitherto they have been dumb, and have 
embittered each other with severe letters. 
The young men are in good spirits, and make 
excursions with fool's bells on sledges, accom- 



To Us Wife. 167 



panied by the ladies ; and they masquerade 
together and are merry, and among them 
Count Gebhard's son. Thus one must under- 
stand that God is exauditor precum} 

I send you trout, which Countess Albrecht 
has given me, who is glad at heart at the 
concord. Your sons are still at Mansfeld ; 
Jacob Luther will take good care of them. 
We eat and drink here like lords, and we are 
well waited upon — indeed, too well ; so that 
we might have forgotten you at Wittenberg. 

D. Jonas's leg nearly became very bad ; 
but there has been nothing worse than wound& 
on the shin ; but God will help. 

You may show all this to M. Philipp, D. 
Pommer, and D. Cruciger. A report has 
reached here that D. Martinus has been 
carried off, as they say, at Leipzig and at 
Magdeburg. Such are the fictions of your 
wiseacres of countr-y people. Some say that 
the Emperor is thirty miles from hence, near 
Soest, in Westphalia ; others, that the French 
are enlisting, and the Landgrave also. But 



' Hearer of prayer. 



168 Luther's Letters to Women. 

let people say as they list ; we will await what 
God will do. Herewith, God be with you. 

M. LUTHEE, D. 

At Eislehen, 
on the Sunday Ycdentine, 1546. 



THE END. 



LONDON : 

LBVET AND CO., PRINTBRS, GREAT NEW STREB'l', 

FETTER LANK, E.C. 



i !,' If 

r f» V 



K'il'r-dSs 





